Now we must go back to Edmund .
When he had been made to walk far further than he had ever known that anybody _could_ walk , the Witch at last halted in a dark valley all overshadowed with fir trees and yew trees .
Edmund simply sank down and lay on his face , doing nothing at all and not even caring what was going to happen next provided they would let him lie still .
He was too tired even to notice how hungry and thirsty he was .
The Witch and the Dwarf were talking close beside him in low tones .
" No , " said the Dwarf , " it is no use now , O Queen .
They must have reached the Stone Table by now . "
" Perhaps the Wolf will smell us out and bring us news , " said the Witch .
" It can not be good news if he does , " said the Dwarf .
" Four thrones in Cair Paravel , " said the Witch .
" How if only three were filled ?
That would not fulfil the prophecy . "
" What difference would that make now that _he_ is here ? " said the Dwarf .
He did not dare , even now , to mention the name of Aslan to his mistress .
" He may not stay long .
And then -- we would fall upon the three at Cair . "
" Yet it might be better , " said the Dwarf , " to keep this one " ( here he kicked Edmund ) " for bargaining with . "
" Yes !
And have him rescued , " said the Witch scornfully .
" Then , " said the Dwarf , " we had better do what we have to do at once . "
" I would like to have done it on the Stone Table itself , " said the Witch .
" That is the proper place .
That is where it has always been done before . "
" It will be a long time now before the Stone Table can again be put to its proper use , " said the Dwarf .
" True , " said the Witch ; and then , " Well , I will begin . "
At that moment with a rush and a snarl a Wolf rushed up to them .
" I have seen them .
They are all at the Stone Table , with _him_ .
They have killed my captain , Fenris Ulf .
I was hidden in the thickets and saw it all .
One of the Sons of Adam killed him .
Fly !
Fly ! "
" No , " said the Witch .
" There need be no flying .
Go quickly .
Summon all our people to meet me here as speedily as they can .
Call out the giants and the werewolves and the spirits of those trees who are on our side .
Call the Ghouls , and the Boggles , the Ogres and the Minotaurs .
Call the Cruels , the Hags , the Spectres , and the people of the Toadstools .
We will fight .
What ?
Have I not still my wand ?
Will not their ranks turn into stone even as they come on ?
Be off quickly , I have a little thing to finish here while you are away . "
The great brute bowed its head , turned , and galloped away .
" Now ! " said she , " we have no table -- let me see .
We had better put it against the trunk of a tree . "
Edmund found himself being roughly forced to his feet .
Then the Dwarf set him with his back against a tree and bound him fast .
He saw the Witch take off her outer mantle .
Her arms were bare underneath it and terribly white .
Because they were so very white he could not see much else , it was so dark in this valley under the dark trees .
" Prepare the victim , " said the Witch .
And the Dwarf undid Edmund 's collar and folded back his shirt at the neck .
Then he took Edmund 's hair and pulled his head back so that he had to raise his chin .
After that Edmund heard a strange noise -- whizz -- whizz -- whizz .
For a moment he could n't think what it was .
Then he realised .
It was the sound of a knife being sharpened !
At that very moment he heard loud shouts from every direction -- a drumming of hoofs and a beating of wings -- a scream from the Witch -- confusion all round him .
And then he found he was being untied .
Strong arms were round him and he heard big , kind voices saying things like " Let him lie down -- give him some wine -- drink this -- steady now -- you 'll be all right in a minute . "
Then he heard the voices of people who were talking not to him but to one another .
And they were saying things like " Who 's got the Witch ?
-- I thought you had her -- I did n't see her after I knocked the knife out of her hand -- I was after the Dwarf -- Do you mean to say she 's escaped ?
-- A chap ca n't mind everything at once -- What 's that ?
Oh sorry it 's only an old stump ! "
But just at this point Edmund went off in a dead faint .
Presently the centaurs and unicorns and deer and birds ( they were of course the rescue party which Aslan had sent in the last chapter ) all set off to go back to the Stone Table , carrying Edmund with them .
But if they could have seen what happened in that valley after they had gone , I think they might have been surprised .
It was perfectly still and presently the moon grew bright , if you had been there you would have seen the moonlight shining on an old tree - stump and on a fair sized boulder .
But if you had gone on looking you would gradually have begun to think there was something odd about both the stump and the boulder .
And next you would have thought that the stump did look really remarkably like a little fat man crouching on the ground .
And if you had watched long enough you would have seen the stump walk across to the boulder and the boulder sit up and begin talking to the stump ; for in reality the stump and the boulder were simply the Witch and the Dwarf .
For it was part of her magic that she could make things look like what they were n't , and she had the presence of mind to do so at the very moment when the knife was knocked out of her hand .
She had kept hold of her wand also , so it had been kept safe , too .
When the other children woke up next morning ( they had been sleeping on piles of cushions in the pavilion ) the first thing they heard -- from Mrs. Beaver -- was that their brother had been rescued and brought into camp late last night ; and was at that moment with Aslan .
As soon as they had breakfasted they all went out , and there they saw Aslan and Edmund walking together in the dewy grass , apart from the rest of the court .
There is no need to tell you ( and no one ever heard ) what Aslan was saying but it was a conversation which Edmund never forgot .
As the others drew nearer Aslan turned to meet them bringing Edmund with him .
" Here is your brother , " he said , " and -- there is no need to talk to him about what is past . "
Edmund shook hands with each of the others and said to each of them in turn , " I 'm sorry , " and everyone said " That 's all right . "
And then everyone wanted very hard to say something which would make it quite clear that they were all friends with him again -- something ordinary and natural -- and of course no one could think of anything in the world to say .
But before they had time to feel really awkward one of the leopards approached Aslan and said :
" Sire , there is a messenger from the enemy who craves audience . "
" Let him approach , " said Aslan .
The leopard went away and soon returned leading the Witch 's Dwarf .
" What is your message , Son of Earth ? " asked Aslan .
" The Queen of Narnia and Empress of the Lone Islands desires a safe conduct to come and speak with you , " said the Dwarf , " on a matter which is as much to your advantage as to hers . "
" Queen of Narnia , indeed ! " said Mr. Beaver .
" Of all the cheek -- "
" Peace , Beaver , " said Aslan .
" All names will soon be restored to their proper owners .
In the meantime we will not dispute about noises .
Tell your mistress , Son of Earth , that I grant her safe conduct on condition that she leaves her wand behind her at that great oak . "
This was agreed to and two leopards went back with the Dwarf to see that the conditions were properly carried out .
" But supposing she turns the two leopards into stone ? " whispered Lucy to Peter .
I think the same idea had occurred to the leopards themselves ; at any rate , as they walked off their fur was all standing up on their backs and their tails were bristling -- like a cat 's when it sees a strange dog .
" It 'll be all right , " whispered Peter in reply .
" He would n't send them if it were n't . "
A few minutes later the Witch herself walked out on to the top of the hill and came straight across and stood before Aslan .
The three children , who had not seen her before , felt shudders running down their backs at the sight of her face ; and there were low growls among all the animals present .
Though it was bright sunshine everyone felt suddenly cold .
The only two people present who seemed to be quite at their ease were Aslan and the Witch herself .
It was the oddest thing to see those two faces -- the golden face and the dead - white face -- so close together .
Not that the Witch looked Aslan exactly in his eyes ; Mrs. Beaver particularly noticed this .
" You have a traitor there , Aslan , " said the Witch .
Of course everyone present knew that she meant Edmund .
But Edmund had got past thinking about himself after all he 'd been through and after the talk he 'd had that morning .
He just went on looking at Aslan .
It did n't seem to matter what the Witch said .
" Well , " said Aslan .
" His offence was not against you . "
" Have you forgotten the Deep Magic ? " asked the Witch .
" Let us say I have forgotten it , " answered Aslan gravely .
" Tell us of this Deep Magic . "
" Tell you ? " said the Witch , her voice growing suddenly shriller .
" Tell you what is written on that very Table of Stone which stands beside us ?
Tell you what is written in letters deep as a spear is long on the trunk of the World Ash Tree ?
Tell you what is engraved on the sceptre of the Emperor - Beyond - the - Sea ?
You at least know the magic which the Emperor put into Narnia at the very beginning .
You know that every traitor belongs to me as my lawful prey and that for every treachery I have a right to a kill . "
" Oh , " said Mr. Beaver .
" So _that's_ how you came to imagine yourself a Queen -- because you were the Emperor 's hangman .
I see . "
" Peace , Beaver , " said Aslan , with a very low growl .
" And so , " continued the Witch , " that human creature is mine .
His life is forfeit to me .
His blood is my property . "
" Come and take it then , " said the Bull with the man 's head in a great bellowing voice .
" Fool , " said the Witch with a savage smile that was almost a snarl , " do you really think your master can rob me of my rights by mere force ?
He knows the Deep Magic better than that .
He knows that unless I have blood as the Law says all Narnia will be overturned and perish in fire and water . "
" It is very true , " said Aslan ; " I do not deny it . "
" Oh , Aslan ! " whispered Susan in the Lion 's ear , " ca n't we -- I mean , you wo n't , will you ?
Ca n't we do something about the Deep Magic ?
Is n't there something you can work against it ? "
" Work against the Emperor 's magic ? " said Aslan turning to her with something like a frown on his face .
And nobody ever made that suggestion to him again .
Edmund was on the other side of Aslan , looking all the time at Aslan 's face .
He felt a choking feeling and wondered if he ought to say something ; but a moment later he felt that he was not expected to do anything except to wait , and do what he was told .
" Fall back , all of you , " said Aslan , " and I will talk to the Witch alone . "
They all obeyed .
It was a terrible time this -- waiting and wondering while the Lion and the Witch talked earnestly together in low voices .
Lucy said , " Oh , Edmund ! " and began to cry .
Peter stood with his back to the others looking out at the distant sea .
The Beavers stood holding each other 's paws with their heads bowed .
The centaurs stamped uneasily with their hoofs .
But everyone became perfectly still in the end , so that you noticed even small sounds like a bumble bee flying past , or the birds in the forest down below them , or the wind rustling the leaves .
And still the talk between Aslan and the White Witch went on .
At last they heard Aslan 's voice .
" You can all come back , " he said .
" I have settled the matter .
She has renounced the claim on your brother 's blood . "
And all over the hill there was a noise as if everyone had been holding his breath and had now begun breathing again , and then a murmur of talk .
They began to come back to Aslan 's throne .
The Witch was just turning away with a look of fierce joy on her face when she stopped and said ,
" But how do I know this promise will be kept ? "
" Wow ! " roared Aslan half rising from his throne ; and his great mouth opened wider and wider and the roar grew louder and louder , and the Witch , after staring for a moment with her lips wide apart , picked up her skirts and fairly ran for her life .