As soon as the Witch had gone Aslan said , " We must move from this place at once , it will be wanted for other purposes .
We shall encamp to - night at the Fords of Beruna . "
Of course everyone was dying to ask him how he had arranged matters with the Witch ; but his face was stern and everyone 's ears were still ringing with the sound of his roar and so nobody dared .
After a meal , which was taken in the open air on the hill - top ( for the sun had got strong by now and dried the grass ) they were busy for a while taking the pavilion down and packing things up .
Before two o'clock they were on the march and set off in a North - Westerly direction , walking at an easy pace for they had not far to go .
During the first part of the journey Aslan explained to Peter his plan of campaign .
" As soon as she has finished her business in these parts , " he said , " the Witch and her crew will almost certainly fall back to her house and prepare for a siege .
You may or may not be able to cut her off and prevent her from reaching it . "
He then went on to outline two plans of battle -- one for fighting the Witch and her people in the wood and another for assaulting her castle .
And all the time he was advising Peter how to conduct the operations , saying things like , " You must put your centaurs in such and such a place " or " You must post scouts to see that she does n't do so - and - so , " till at last Peter said ,
" But you will be there yourself , Aslan . "
" I can give you no promise of that , " answered the Lion .
And he continued giving Peter his instructions .
For the last part of the journey it was Susan and Lucy who saw most of him .
He did not talk very much and seemed to them to be sad .
It was still afternoon when they came down to a place where the river valley had widened out and the river was broad and shallow .
This was the Fords of Beruna and Aslan gave orders to halt on this side of the water .
But Peter said ,
" Would n't it be better to camp on the far side -- for fear she should try a night attack or anything ? "
Aslan who seemed to have been thinking about something else roused himself with a shake of his magnificent mane and said , " Eh ?
What 's that ? "
Peter said it all over again .
" No , " said Aslan in a dull voice , as if it did n't matter .
" No .
She will not make an attack to - night . "
And then he sighed deeply .
But presently he added , " All the same it was well thought of .
That is how a soldier ought to think .
But it does n't really matter . "
So they proceeded to pitch their camp .
Aslan 's mood affected everyone that evening .
Peter was feeling uncomfortable too at the idea of fighting the battle on his own ; the news that Aslan might not be there had come as a great shock to him .
Supper that evening was a quiet meal .
Everyone felt how different it had been last night or even that morning .
It was as if the good times , having just begun , were already drawing to their end .
This feeling affected Susan so much that she could n't get to sleep when she went to bed .
And after she had lain counting sheep and turning over and over she heard Lucy give a long sigh and turn over just beside her in the darkness .
" Ca n't you get to sleep either ? " said Susan .
" No , " said Lucy .
" I thought you were asleep .
I say , Susan ? "
" What ? "
" I 've a most horrible feeling -- as if something were hanging over us . "
" Have you ?
Because , as a matter of fact , so have I. "
" Something about Aslan , " said Lucy .
" Either some dreadful thing that is going to happen to him , or something dreadful that he 's going to do . "
" There 's been something wrong with him all afternoon , " said Susan .
" Lucy !
What was that he said about not being with us at the battle ?
You do n't think he could be stealing away and leaving us to - night , do you ? "
" Where is he now ? " said Lucy .
" Is he here in the pavilion ? "
" I do n't think so . "
" Susan !
Let 's go outside and have a look round .
We might see him . "
" All right .
Let 's , " said Susan , " we might just as well be doing that as lying awake here . "
Very quietly the two girls groped their way among the other sleepers and crept out of the tent .
The moonlight was bright and everything was quite still except for the noise of the river chattering over the stones .
Then Susan suddenly caught Lucy 's arm and said , " Look ! "
On the far side of the camping ground , just where the trees began , they saw the Lion slowly walking away from them into the wood .
Without a word they both followed him .
He led them up the steep slope out of the river valley and then slightly to the left -- apparently by the very same route which they had used that afternoon in coming from the Hill of the Stone Table .
On and on he led them , into dark shadows and out into pale moonlight , getting their feet wet with the heavy dew .
He looked somehow different from the Aslan they knew .
His tail and his head hung low and he walked slowly as if he were very , very tired .
Then , when they were crossing a wide open place where there were no shadows for them to hide in , he stopped and looked round .
It was no good trying to run away so they came towards him .
When they were closer he said ,
" Oh , children , children , why are you following me ? "
" We could n't sleep , " said Lucy -- and then felt sure that she need say no more and that Aslan knew all they had been thinking .
" Please , may we come with you -- wherever you 're going ? " said Susan .
" Well -- " said Aslan and seemed to be thinking .
Then he said , " I should be glad of company to - night .
Yes , you may come , if you will promise to stop when I tell you , and after that leave me to go on alone . "
" Oh , thank you , thank you .
And we will , " said the two girls .
Forward they went again and one of the girls walked on each side of the Lion .
But how slowly he walked !
And his great , royal head drooped so that his nose nearly touched the grass .
Presently he stumbled and gave a low moan .
" Aslan !
Dear Aslan ! " said Lucy , " what is wrong ?
Ca n't you tell us ? "
" Are you ill , dear Aslan ? " asked Susan .
" No , " said Aslan .
" I am sad and lonely .
Lay your hands on my mane so that I can feel you are there and let us walk like that . "
And so the girls did what they would never have dared to do without his permission but what they had longed to do ever since they first saw him -- buried their cold hands in the beautiful sea of fur and stroked it and , so doing , walked with him .
And presently they saw that they were going with him up the slope of the hill on which the Stone Table stood .
They went up at the side where the trees came furthest up , and when they got to the last tree ( it was one that had some bushes about it ) Aslan stopped and said ,
" Oh , children , children .
Here you must stop .
And whatever happens , do not let yourselves be seen .
Farewell . "
And both the girls cried bitterly ( though they hardly knew why ) and clung to the Lion and kissed his mane and his nose and his paws and his great , sad eyes .
Then he turned from them and walked out onto the top of the hill .
And Lucy and Susan , crouching in the bushes , looked after him and this is what they saw .
A great crowd of people were standing all round the Stone Table and though the moon was shining many of them carried torches which burned with evil - looking red flames and black smoke .
But such people !
Ogres with monstrous teeth , and wolves , and bull - headed men ; spirits of evil trees and poisonous plants ; and other creatures whom I wo n't describe because if I did the grown - ups would probably not let you read this book -- Cruels and Hags and Incubuses , Wraiths , Horrors , Efreets , Sprites , Orknies , Wooses , and Ettins .
In fact here were all those who were on the Witch 's side and whom the Wolf had summoned at her command .
And right in the middle , standing by the Table , was the Witch herself .
A howl and a gibber of dismay went up from the creatures when they first saw the great Lion pacing towards them , and for a moment the Witch herself seemed to be struck with fear .
Then she recovered herself and gave a wild , fierce laugh .
" The fool ! " she cried .
" The fool has come .
Bind him fast . "
Lucy and Susan held their breaths waiting for Aslan 's roar and his spring upon his enemies .
But it never came .
Four hags , grinning and leering , yet also ( at first ) hanging back and half afraid of what they had to do , had approached him .
" Bind him , I say ! " repeated the White Witch .
The hags made a dart at him and shrieked with triumph when they found that he made no resistance at all .
Then others -- evil dwarfs and apes -- rushed in to help them and between them they rolled the huge Lion round on his back and tied all his four paws together , shouting and cheering as if they had done something brave , though , had the Lion chosen , one of those paws could have been the death of them all .
But he made no noise , even when the enemies , straining and tugging , pulled the cords so tight that they cut into his flesh .
Then they began to drag him towards the Stone Table .
" Stop ! " said the Witch .
" Let him first be shaved . "
Another roar of mean laughter went up from her followers as an ogre with a pair of shears came forward and squatted down by Aslan 's head .
Snip - snip - snip went the shears and masses of curling gold began to fall to the ground .
Then the ogre stood back and the children , watching from their hiding - place , could see the face of Aslan looking all small and different without its mane .
The enemies also saw the difference .
" Why , he 's only a great cat after all ! " cried one .
" Is _that_ what we were afraid of ? " said another .
And they surged round Aslan jeering at him , saying things like " Puss , Puss !
Poor Pussy , " and " How many mice have you caught to - day , Cat ? " and " Would you like a saucer of milk , Pussums ? "
" Oh how _can_ they ? " said Lucy , tears streaming down her cheeks .
" The brutes , the brutes ! " for now that the first shock was over the shorn face of Aslan looked to her braver , and more beautiful , and more patient than ever .
" Muzzle him ! " said the Witch .
And even now , as they worked about his face putting on the muzzle , one bite from his jaws would have cost two or three of them their hands .
But he never moved .
And this seemed to enrage all that rabble .
Everyone was at him now .
Those who had been afraid to come near him even after he was bound began to find their courage , and for a few minutes the two girls could not even see him -- so thickly was he surrounded by the whole crowd of creatures kicking him , hitting him , spitting on him , jeering at him .
At last the rabble had had enough of this .
They began to drag the bound and muzzled Lion to the Stone Table , some pulling and some pushing .
He was so huge that even when they got him there it took all their efforts to hoist him onto the surface of it .
Then there was more tying and tightening of cords .
" The cowards !
The cowards ! " sobbed Susan .
" Are they _still_ afraid of him , even now ? "
When once Aslan had been tied ( and tied so that he was really a mass of cords ) on the flat stone , a hush fell on the crowd .
Four Hags , holding four torches , stood at the corners of the Table .
The Witch bared her arms as she had bared them the previous night when it had been Edmund instead of Aslan .
Then she began to whet her knife .
It looked to the children , when the gleam of the torchlight fell on it , as if the knife were made of stone not of steel and it was of a strange and evil shape .
At last she drew near .
She stood by Aslan 's head .
Her face was working and twitching with passion , but his looked up at the sky , still quiet , neither angry nor afraid , but a little sad .
Then , just before she gave the blow , she stooped down and said in a quivering voice ,
" And now , who has won ?
Fool , did you think that by all this you would save the human traitor ?
Now I will kill you instead of him as our pact was and so the Deep Magic will be appeased .
But when you are dead what will prevent me from killing him as well ?
And who will take him out of my hand _then_ ?
Understand that you have given me Narnia forever , you have lost your own life and you have not saved his .
In that knowledge , despair and die . "
The children did not see the actual moment of the killing .
They could n't bear to look and had covered their eyes .