After this , Caspian and his Tutor had many more secret conversations on the top of the Great Tower , and at each conversation Caspian learned more about Old Narnia , so that thinking and dreaming about the old days , and longing that they might come back , filled nearly all his spare hours .
But of course he had not many hours to spare , for now his education was beginning in earnest .
He learned sword - fighting and riding , swimming and diving , how to shoot with the bow and play on the recorder and the theorbo , how to hunt the stag and cut him up when he was dead , besides Cosmography , Rhetoric , Heraldry , Versification , and of course History , with a little Law , Physic , Alchemy and Astronomy .
Of Magic he learned only the theory , for Doctor Cornelius said the practical part was not a proper study for princes .
" And I myself , " he added , " am only a very imperfect magician and can do only the smallest experiments . "
Of Navigation ( " Which is a noble and heroical art , " said the Doctor ) he was taught nothing , because King Miraz disapproved of ships and the sea .
He also learned a great deal by using his own eyes and ears .
As a little boy he had often wondered why he disliked his aunt , Queen Prunaprismia ; he now saw that it was because she disliked him .
He also began to see that Narnia was an unhappy country .
The taxes were high and the laws were stern and Miraz was a cruel man .
After some years there came a time when the Queen seemed to be ill and there was a great deal of bustle and pother about her in the castle and doctors came and the courtiers whispered .
This was in early summertime .
And one night , while all this fuss was going on , Caspian was unexpectedly wakened by Doctor Cornelius after he had been only a few hours in bed .
" Are we going to do a little Astronomy , Doctor ? " said Caspian .
" Hush ! " said the Doctor .
" Trust me and do exactly as I tell you .
Put on all your clothes ; you have a long journey before you . "
Caspian was very surprised , but he had learned to have confidence in his Tutor and he began doing what he was told at once .
When he was dressed the Doctor said , " I have a wallet for you .
We must go into the next room and fill it with victuals from your Highness 's supper table . "
" My gentlemen - in-waiting will be there , " said Caspian .
" They are fast asleep and will not wake , " said the Doctor .
" I am a very minor magician but I can at least contrive a charmed sleep . "
They went into the antechamber and there , sure enough , the two gentlemen - in-waiting were , sprawling on chairs and snoring hard .
Doctor Cornelius quickly cut up the remains of a cold chicken and some slices of venison and put them , with bread and an apple or so and a little flask of good wine , into the wallet which he then gave to Caspian .
It fitted on by a strap over Caspian 's shoulder , like a satchel you would use for taking books to school .
" Have you your sword ? " asked the Doctor .
" Yes , " said Caspian .
" Then put this mantle over all to hide the sword and the wallet .
That 's right .
And now we must go to the Great Tower and talk . "
When they had reached the top of the Tower ( it was a cloudy night , not at all like the night when they had seen the conjunction of Tarva and Alambil ) Doctor Cornelius said ,
" Dear Prince , you must leave this castle at once and go to seek your fortune in the wide world .
Your life is in danger here . "
" Why ? asked Caspian .
" Because you are the true King of Narnia : Caspian the Tenth , the true son and heir of Caspian the Ninth .
Long life to your Majesty " -- and suddenly , to Caspian 's great surprise , the little man dropped down on one knee and kissed his hand .
" What does it all mean ?
I do n't understand , " said Caspian .
" I wonder you have never asked me before , " said the Doctor , " why , being the son of King Caspian , you are not King Caspian yourself .
Everyone except your Majesty knows that Miraz is a usurper .
When he first began to rule he did not even pretend to be the King : he called himself Lord Protector .
But then your royal mother died , the good Queen and the only Telmarine who was ever kind to me .
And then , one by one , all the great lords , who had known your father , died or disappeared .
Not by accident , either .
Miraz weeded them out .
Belisar and Uvilas were shot with arrows on a hunting party : by chance , it was pretended .
All the great house of the Passarids he sent to fight giants on the northern frontier till one by one they fell .
Arlian and Erimon and a dozen more he executed for treason on a false charge .
The two brothers of Beaversdam he shut up as madmen .
And finally he persuaded the seven noble lords , who alone among all the Telmarines did not fear the sea , to sail away and look for new lands beyond the Eastern Ocean , and , as he intended , they never came back .
And when there was no one left who could speak a word for you , then his flatterers ( as he had instructed them ) begged him to become King .
And of course he did . "
" Do you mean he now wants to kill me too ? " said Caspian .
" That is almost certain , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" But why now ? " said Caspian .
" I mean , why did n't he do it long ago if he wanted to ?
And what harm have I done him ? "
" He has changed his mind about you because of something that happened only two hours ago .
The Queen has had a son . "
" I do n't see what that 's got to do with it , " said Caspian .
" Do n't see ! " exclaimed the Doctor .
" Have all my lessons in History and Politics taught you no more than that ?
Listen .
As long as he had no children of his own , he was willing enough that you should be King after he died .
He may not have cared much about you , but he would rather you should have the throne than a stranger .
Now that he has a son of his own he will want his own son to be the next King .
You are in the way .
He 'll clear you out of the way . "
" Is he really as bad as that ? " said Caspian .
" Would he really murder me ? "
" He murdered your Father , " said Doctor Cornelius .
Caspian felt very queer and said nothing .
" I can tell you the whole story , " said the Doctor .
" But not now .
There is no time .
You must fly at once . "
" You 'll come with me ? " said Caspian .
" I dare not , " said the Doctor .
" It would make your danger greater .
Two are more easily tracked than one .
Dear Prince , dear King Caspian , you must be very brave .
You must go alone and at once .
Try to get across the southern border to the court of King Nain of Archenland .
He will be good to you . "
" Shall I never see you again ? " said Caspian in a quavering voice .
" I hope so , dear King , " said the Doctor .
" What friend have I in the wide world except your Majesty ?
And I have a little magic .
But in the meantime , speed is everything .
Here are two gifts before you go .
This is a little purse of gold -- alas , all the treasure in this castle should be your own by rights .
And here is something far better . "
He put in Caspian 's hands something which he could hardly see but which he knew by the feel to be a horn .
" That , " said Doctor Cornelius , " is the greatest and most sacred treasure of Narnia .
Many terrors I endured , many spells did I utter , to find it , when I was still young .
It is the magic horn of Queen Susan herself which she left behind her when she vanished from Narnia at the end of the Golden Age .
It is said that whoever blows it shall have strange help -- no one can say how strange .
It may have power to call Queen Lucy and King Edmund and Queen Susan and the High King Peter back from the past , and they will set all to rights .
It may be that it will call up Aslan himself .
Take it , King Caspian : but do not use it except at your greatest need .
And now , haste , haste , haste .
The little door at the very bottom of the Tower , the door into the garden , is unlocked .
There we must part . "
" Ca n't I get my horse Destrier ? " said Caspian .
" He is already saddled and waiting for you just at the corner of the orchard . "
During the long climb down the winding staircase Cornelius whispered many more words of direction and advice .
Caspian 's heart was sinking , but he tried to take it all in .
Then came the fresh air in the garden , a fervent handclasp with the Doctor , a run across the lawn , a welcoming whinny from Destrier , and so King Caspian the Tenth left the castle of his fathers .
Looking back , he saw fireworks going up to celebrate the birth of the new prince .
All night he rode southward , choosing by - ways and bridle paths through woods as long as he was in country that he knew ; but afterwards he kept to the high road .
Destrier was as excited as his master at this unusual journey , and Caspian , though tears had come into his eyes at saying good - bye to Doctor Cornelius , felt brave and , in a way , happy , to think that he was King Caspian riding to seek adventures , with his sword on his left hip and Queen Susan 's magic horn on his right .
But when day came , with a sprinkle of rain , and he looked about him and saw on every side unknown woods , wild heaths and blue mountains , he thought how large and strange the world was and felt frightened and small .
As soon as it was full daylight he left the road and found an open grassy place amid a wood where he could rest .
He took off Destrier 's bridle and let him graze , ate some cold chicken and drank a little wine , and presently fell asleep .
It was late afternoon when he awoke .
He ate a morsel and continued his journey , still southward , by many unfrequented lanes .
He was now in a land of hills , going up and down , but always more up than down .
From every ridge he could see the mountains growing bigger and blacker ahead .
As the evening closed in , he was riding their lower slopes .
The wind rose .
Soon rain fell in torrents .
Destrier became uneasy ; there was thunder in the air .
And now they entered a dark and seemingly endless pine forest , and all the stories Caspian had ever heard of trees being unfriendly to Man crowded into his mind .
He remembered that he was , after all , a Telmarine , one of the race who cut down trees wherever they could and were at war with all wild things ; and though he himself might be unlike other Telmarines , the trees could not be expected to know this .
Nor did they .
The wind became a tempest , the woods roared and creaked all round him .
There came a crash .
A tree fell right across the road just behind him .
" Quiet , Destrier , quiet ! " said Caspian , patting his horse 's neck ; but he was trembling himself and knew that he had escaped death by an inch .
Lightning flashed and a great crack of thunder seemed to break the sky in two just overhead .
Destrier bolted in good earnest .
Caspian was a good rider , but he had not the strength to hold him back .
He kept his seat , but he knew that his life hung by a thread during the wild career that followed .
Tree after tree rose up before them in the dusk and was only just avoided .
Then , almost too suddenly to hurt ( and yet it did hurt him too ) something struck Caspian on the forehead and he knew no more .
When he came to himself he was lying in a firelit place with bruised limbs and a bad headache .
Low voices were speaking close at hand .
" And now , " said one , " before it wakes up we must decide what to do with it . "
" Kill it , " said another .
" We ca n't let it live .
It would betray us . "
" We ought to have killed it at once , or else let it alone , " said a third voice .
" We ca n't kill it now .
Not after we 've taken it in and bandaged its head and all .
It would be murdering a guest . "
" Gentlemen , " said Caspian in a feeble voice , " whatever you do to me , I hope you will be kind to my poor horse . "
" Your horse had taken flight long before we found you , " said the first voice -- a curiously husky , earthy voice , as Caspian now noticed .
" Now do n't let it talk you round with its pretty words , " said the second voice .
" I still say ---- "
" Horns and halibuts ! " exclaimed the third voice .
" Of course we 're not going to murder it .
For shame , Nikabrik .
What do you say , Trufflehunter ?
What shall we do with it ? "
" I shall give it a drink , " said the first voice , presumably Trufflehunter 's .
A dark shape approached the bed .
Caspian felt an arm slipped gently under his shoulders -- if it was exactly an arm .
The shape somehow seemed wrong .
The face that bent towards him seemed wrong too .
He got the impression that it was very hairy and very long nosed , and there were odd white patches on each side of it .
" It 's a mask of some sort , " thought Caspian .
" Or perhaps I 'm in a fever and imagining it all . "
A cupful of something sweet and hot was set to his lips and he drank .
At that moment one of the others poked the fire .
A blaze sprang up and Caspian almost screamed with the shock as the sudden light revealed the face that was looking into his own .
It was not a man 's face but a badger 's , though larger and friendlier and more intelligent than the face of any badger he had seen before .
And it had certainly been talking .
He saw , too , that he was on a bed of heather , in a cave .
By the fire sat two little bearded men , so much wilder and shorter and hairier and thicker than Doctor Cornelius that he knew them at once for real Dwarfs , ancient Dwarfs with not a drop of human blood in their veins .
And Caspian knew that he had found the Old Narnians at last .
Then his head began to swim again .
In the next few days he learned to know them by names .
The Badger was called Trufflehunter ; he was the oldest and kindest of the three .
The Dwarf who had wanted to kill Caspian was a sour Black Dwarf ( that is , his hair and beard were black , and thick and hard like horse - hair ) .
His name was Nikabrik .
The other Dwarf was a Red Dwarf with hair rather like a Fox 's and he was called Trumpkin .
" And now , " said Nikabrik on the first evening when Caspian was well enough to sit up and talk , " we still have to decide what to do with this Human .
You two think you 've done it a great kindness by not letting me kill it .
But I suppose the upshot is that we have to keep it a prisoner for life .
I 'm certainly not going to let it go alive -- to go back to its own kind and betray us all . "
" Bulbs and bolsters !
Nikabrik , " said Trumpkin .
" Why need you talk so unhandsomely ?
It is n't the creature 's fault that it bashed its head against a tree outside our hole .
And I do n't think it looks like a traitor . "
" I say , " said Caspian , " you have n't yet found out whether I _want_ to go back .
I do n't .
I want to stay with you -- if you 'll let me .
I 've been looking for people like you all my life . "
" That 's a likely story , " growled Nikabrik .
" You 're a Telmarine and a Human , are n't you ?
Of course you want to go back to your own kind . "
" Well , even if I did , I could n't , " said Caspian .
" I was flying for my life when I had my accident .
The King wants to kill me .
If you 'd killed me , you 'd have done the very thing to please him . "
" Well now , " said Trufflehunter , " you do n't say so ! "
" Eh ? " said Trumpkin .
" What 's that ?
What have you been doing , Human , to fall foul of Miraz at your age ? "
" He 's my uncle , " began Caspian , when Nikabrik jumped up with his hand on his dagger .
" There you are ! " he cried .
" Not only a Telmarine but close kin and heir to our greatest enemy .
Are you still mad enough to let this creature live ? "
He would have stabbed Caspian then and there , if the Badger and Trumpkin had not got in the way and forced him back to his seat and held him down .
" Now , once and for all , Nikabrik , " said Trumpkin .
" Will you contain yourself , or must Trufflehunter and I sit on your head ? "
Nikabrik sulkily promised to behave , and the other two asked Caspian to tell his whole story .
When he had done so there was a moment 's silence .
" This is the queerest thing I ever heard , " said Trumpkin .
" I do n't like it , " said Nikabrik .
" I did n't know there were stories about us still told among the Humans .
The less they know about us the better .
That old nurse , now .
She 'd better have held her tongue .
And it 's all mixed up with that Tutor : a renegade Dwarf .
I hate 'em .
I hate 'em worse than the Humans .
You mark my words -- no good will come of it . "
" Do n't you go talking about things you do n't understand , Nikabrik , " said Trufflehunter .
" You Dwarfs are as forgetful and changeable as the Humans themselves .
I 'm a beast , I am , and a Badger what 's more .
We do n't change .
We hold on .
I say great good will come of it .
This is the true King of Narnia we 've got here : a true King , coming back to true Narnia .
And we beasts remember , even if Dwarfs forget , that Narnia was never right except when a son of Adam was King . "
" Whistles and whirligigs !
Trufflehunter , " said Trumpkin .
" You do n't mean you want to give the country to Humans ? "
" I said nothing about that , " answered the Badger .
" It 's not Men 's country ( who should know that better than me ? ) but it 's a country for a man to be King of .
We badgers have long enough memories to know that .
Why , bless us all , was n't the High King Peter a Man ? "
" Do you believe all those old stories ? " asked Trumpkin .
" I tell you , we do n't change , we beasts , " said Trufflehunter .
" We do n't forget .
I believe in the High King Peter and the rest that reigned at Cair Paravel , as firmly as I believe in Aslan himself . "
" As firmly as _that_ , I dare say , " said Trumpkin .
" But who believes in Aslan nowadays ? "
" I do , " said Caspian .
" And if I had n't believed in him before , I would now .
Back there among the Humans the people who laughed at Aslan would have laughed at stories about Talking Beasts and Dwarfs .
Sometimes I did wonder if there really was such a person as Aslan : but then sometimes I wondered if there were really people like you .
Yet there you are . "
" That 's right , " said Trufflehunter .
" You 're right , King Caspian .
And as long as you will be true to Old Narnia you shall be _my_ King , whatever they say .
Long life to your Majesty . "
" You make me sick , Badger , " growled Nikabrik .
" The High King Peter and the rest may have been Men , but they were a different sort of Men .
This is one of the cursed Telmarines .
He has _hunted_ beasts for sport .
Have n't you , now ? " he added , rounding suddenly on Caspian .
" Well , to tell you the truth , I have , " said Caspian .
" But they were n't Talking Beasts . "
" It 's all the same thing , " said Nikabrik .
" No , no , no , " said Trufflehunter .
" You know it is n't .
You know very well that the beasts in Narnia nowadays are different and are no more than the poor dumb , witless creatures you 'd find in Kalormen or Telmar .
They 're smaller too .
They 're far more different from us than the half - Dwarfs are from you . "
There was a great deal more talk , but it all ended with the agreement that Caspian should stay and even the promise that , as soon as he was able to go out , he should be taken to see what Trumpkin called " the Others " ; for apparently in these wild parts all sorts of creatures from the Old Days of Narnia still lived on in hiding .