The place where they had met the Fauns was , of course , Dancing Lawn itself , and here Caspian and his friends remained till the night of the Great Council .
To sleep under the stars , to drink nothing but well water and to live chiefly on nuts and wild fruit , was a strange experience for Caspian after his bed with silken sheets in a tapestried chamber at the castle , with meals laid out on gold and silver dishes in the ante-room , and attendants ready at his call .
But he had never enjoyed himself more .
Never had sleep been more refreshing nor food tasted more savoury , and he began already to harden and his face wore a kinglier look .
When the great night came , and his various strange subjects came stealing into the lawn by ones and twos and threes or by sixes and sevens -- the moon then shining almost at her full -- his heart swelled as he saw their numbers and heard their greetings .
All whom he had met were there : Bulgy Bears and Red Dwarfs and Black Dwarfs , Moles and Badgers , Hares and Hedgehogs , and others whom he had not yet seen -- five Satyrs as red as foxes , the whole contingent of Talking Mice , armed to the teeth and following a shrill trumpet , some Owls , the Old Raven of Ravenscaur .
Last of all ( and this took Caspian 's breath away ) , with the Centaurs came a small but genuine Giant , Wimbleweather of Deadman 's Hill , carrying on his back a basketful of rather sea - sick Dwarfs who had accepted his offer of a lift and were now wishing they had walked instead .
The Bulgy Bears were very anxious to have the feast first and leave the council till afterwards : perhaps till to - morrow .
Reepicheep and his Mice said that councils and feasts could both wait , and proposed storming Miraz in his own castle that very night .
Pattertwig and the other Squirrels said they could talk and eat at the same time , so why not have the council and feast all at once ?
The Moles proposed throwing up entrenchments round the Lawn before they did anything else .
The Fauns thought it would be better to begin with a solemn dance .
The Old Raven , while agreeing with the Bears that it would take too long to have a full council before supper , begged to be allowed to give a brief address to the whole company .
But Caspian and the Centaurs and the Dwarfs over-ruled all these suggestions and insisted on holding a real council of war at once .
When all the other creatures had been persuaded to sit down quietly in a great circle , and when ( with more difficulty ) they had got Pattertwig to stop running to and fro and saying " Silence !
Silence , everyone , for the King 's speech , " Caspian , feeling a little nervous , got up .
" Narnians ! " he began , but he never got any further , for at that very moment Camillo the Hare said , " Hush !
There 's a Man somewhere near . "
They were all creatures of the wild , accustomed to being hunted , and they all became still as statues .
The beasts all turned their noses in the direction which Camillo had indicated .
" Smells like Man and yet not quite like Man , " whispered Trufflehunter .
" It 's getting steadily nearer , " said Camillo .
" Two badgers and you three Dwarfs , with your bow at the ready , go softly off to meet it , " said Caspian .
" We 'll settle ' un , " said a Black Dwarf grimly , fitting a shaft to his bowstring .
" Do n't shoot if it is alone , " said Caspian .
" Catch it . "
" Why ? " asked the Dwarf .
" Do as you 're told , " said Glenstorm the Centaur .
Everyone waited in silence while the three Dwarfs and two Badgers trotted stealthily across to the trees on the north - west side of the Lawn .
Then came a sharp dwarfish cry , " Stop !
Who goes there ? " and a sudden spring .
A moment later a voice , which Caspian knew well , could be heard saying , " All right , all right , I 'm unarmed .
Take my wrists if you like , worthy Badgers , but do n't bite right through them .
I want to speak to the King . "
" Doctor Cornelius ! " cried Caspian with joy , and rushed forward to greet his old master .
Everyone else crowded round .
" Pah ! " said Nikabrik .
" A renegade Dwarf .
A half - and - halfer !
Shall I pass my sword through its throat ? "
" Be quiet , Nikabrik , " said Trumpkin .
" The creature ca n't help its ancestry . "
" This is my greatest friend and the saviour of my life , " said Caspian .
" And anyone who does n't like his company may leave my army : at once .
Dearest Doctor , I _am_ glad to see you again .
How ever did you find us out ? "
" By a little use of simple magic , your Majesty , " said the Doctor , who was still puffing and blowing from having walked so fast .
" But there 's no time to go into that now .
We must all fly from this place at once .
You are already betrayed and Miraz is on the move .
Before mid-day to - morrow you will be surrounded . "
" Betrayed ! " said Caspian .
" And by whom ? "
" Another renegade Dwarf , no doubt , " said Nikabrik .
" By your horse Destrier , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" The poor brute knew no better .
When you were knocked off , of course , he went dawdling back to his stable in the castle .
Then the secret of your flight was known .
I made myself scarce , having no wish to be questioned about it in Miraz 's torture chamber .
I had a pretty good guess from my crystal as to where I should find you .
But all day -- that was the day before yesterday -- I saw Miraz 's tracking parties out in the woods .
Yesterday I learned that his army is out .
I do n't think some of your -- um -- pure - blooded Dwarfs have as much woodcraft as might be expected .
You 've left tracks all over the place .
Great carelessness .
At any rate something has warned Miraz that Old Narnia is not so dead as he had hoped , and he is on the move . "
" Hurrah ! " said a very shrill and small voice from somewhere at the Doctor 's feet .
" Let them come !
All I ask is that the King will put me and my people in the front . "
" What on earth ? " said Doctor Cornelius .
" Has your Majesty got grasshoppers -- or mosquitoes -- in your army ? "
Then after stooping down and peering carefully through his spectacles , he broke into a laugh .
" By the Lion , " he swore , " it 's a mouse .
Signior Mouse , I desire your better acquaintance .
I am honoured by meeting so valiant a beast . "
" My friendship you shall have , learned Man , " piped Reepicheep .
" And any Dwarf -- or Giant -- in the army who does not give you good language shall have my sword to reckon with . "
" Is there time for this foolery ? " asked Nikabrik .
" What are our plans ?
Battle or flight ? "
" Battle if need be , " said Trumpkin .
" But we are hardly ready for it yet , and this is no very defensible place . "
" I do n't like the idea of running away , " said Caspian .
" Hear him !
Hear him ! " said the Bulgy Bears .
" Whatever we do , do n't let 's have any _running_ .
Especially not before supper ; and not too soon after it neither . "
" Those who run first do not always run last , " said the Centaur .
" And why should we let the enemy choose our position instead of choosing it ourselves ?
Let us find a strong place . "
" That 's wise , your Majesty , that 's wise , " said Trufflehunter .
" But where are we to go ? " asked several voices .
" Your Majesty , " said Doctor Cornelius , " and all you variety of creatures , I think we must fly east and down the river to the great woods .
The Telmarines hate that region .
They have always been afraid of the sea and of something that may come over the sea .
That is why they have let the great woods grow up .
If traditions speak true , the ancient Cair Paravel was at the river - mouth .
All that part is friendly to us and hateful to our enemies .
We must go to Aslan 's How . "
" Aslan 's How ? " said several voices .
" We do not know what it is . "
" It lies within the skirts of the Great Woods and it is a huge mound which Narnians raised in very ancient times over a very magical place , where there stood -- and perhaps still stands -- a very magical Stone .
The Mound is all hollowed out within into galleries and caves , and the Stone is in the central cave of all .
There is room in the mound for all our stores , and those of us who have most need of cover and are most accustomed to underground life can be lodged in the caves .
The rest of us can lie in the wood .
At a pinch all of us ( except this worthy Giant ) could retreat into the Mound itself , and there we should be beyond the reach of every danger except famine . "
" It is a good thing we have a learned man among us , " said Trufflehunter ; but Trumpkin muttered under his breath , " Soup and celery !
I wish our leaders would think less about these old wives ' tales and more about victuals and arms . "
But all approved of Cornelius 's proposal and that very night , half an hour later , they were on the march .
Before sunrise they arrived at Aslan 's How .
It was certainly an awesome place , a round green hill on top of another hill , long since grown over with trees , and one little , low doorway leading into it .
The tunnels inside were a perfect maze till you got to know them , and they were lined and roofed with smooth stones , and on the stones , peering in the twilight , Caspian saw strange characters and snaky patterns , and pictures in which the form of a Lion was repeated again and again .
It all seemed to belong to an even older Narnia than the Narnia of which his nurse had told him .
It was after they had taken up their quarters in and around the How that fortune began to turn against them .
King Miraz 's scouts soon found their new lair , and he and his army arrived on the edge of the woods .
And as so often happens , the enemy turned out stronger than they had reckoned .
Caspian 's heart sank as he saw company after company arriving .
And though Miraz 's men may have been afraid of going into the wood , they were even more afraid of Miraz , and with him in command they carried battle deeply into it and sometimes almost to the How itself .
Caspian and other captains of course made many sorties into the open country .
Thus there was fighting on most days and sometimes by night as well ; but Caspian 's party had on the whole the worst of it .
At last there came a night when everything had gone as badly as possible , and the rain which had been falling heavily all day had ceased at nightfall only to give place to raw cold .
That morning Caspian had arranged what was his biggest battle yet , and all had hung their hopes on it .
He , with most of the Dwarfs , was to have fallen on the King 's right wing at daybreak , and then , when they were heavily engaged , Giant Wimbleweather , with the Centaurs and some of the fiercest beasts , was to have broken out from another place and endeavoured to cut the King 's right off from the rest of the army .
But it had all failed .
No one had warned Caspian ( because no one in these later days of Narnia remembered ) that Giants are not at all clever .
Poor Wimbleweather , though as brave as a lion , was a true Giant in that respect .
He had broken out at the wrong time and from the wrong place , and both his party and Caspian 's had suffered badly and done the enemy little harm .
The best of the Bears had been hurt , a Centaur terribly wounded , and there were few in Caspian 's party who had not lost blood .
It was a gloomy company that huddled under the dripping trees to eat their scanty supper .
The gloomiest of all was Giant Wimbleweather .
He knew it was all his fault .
He sat in silence shedding big tears which collected on the end of his nose and then fell off with a huge splash on the whole bivouac of the Mice , who had just been beginning to get warm and drowsy .
They all jumped up , shaking the water out of their ears and wringing their little blankets , and asked the Giant in shrill but forcible voices whether he thought they were n't wet enough without this sort of thing .
And then other people woke up and told the Mice they had been enrolled as scouts and not as a concert party , and asked why they could n't keep quiet .
And Wimbleweather tiptoed away to find some place where he could be miserable in peace and stepped on somebody 's tail and somebody ( they said afterwards it was a fox ) bit him .
And so everyone was out of temper .
But in the secret and magical chamber at the heart of the How , King Caspian , with Cornelius and the Badger and Nikabrik and Trumpkin , were at council .
Thick pillars of ancient workmanship supported the roof .
In the centre was the Stone itself -- a stone table , split right down the centre , and covered with what had once been writing of some kind : but ages of wind and rain and snow had almost worn them away in old times when the Stone Table had stood on the hilltop , and the Mound had not yet been built above it .
They were not using the Table nor sitting round it : it was too magic a thing for any common use .
They sat on logs a little way from it , and between them was a rough wooden table , on which stood a rude clay lamp lighting up their pale faces and throwing big shadows on the walls .
" If your Majesty is ever to use the Horn , " said Trufflehunter , " I think the time has now come . "
Caspian had of course told them of this treasure several days ago .
" We are certainly in great need , " answered Caspian .
" But it is hard to be sure we are at our greatest .
Supposing there came an even worse need and we had already used it ? "
" By that argument , " said Nikabrik , " your Majesty will never use it until it is too late . "
" I agree with that , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" And what do you think , Trumpkin ? " asked Caspian .
" Oh , as for me , " said the Red Dwarf , who had been listening with complete indifference , " your Majesty knows I think the Horn -- and that bit of broken stone over there -- and your great King Peter -- and your Lion Aslan -- are all eggs in moonshine .
It 's all one to me when your Majesty blows the Horn .
All I insist is that the army is told nothing about it .
There 's no good raising hopes of magical help which ( as I think ) are sure to be disappointed . "
" Then in the name of Aslan we will wind Queen Susan 's Horn , " said Caspian .
" There is one thing , Sire , " said Doctor Cornelius , " that should perhaps be done first .
We do not know what form the help will take .
It might call Aslan himself from oversea .
But I think it is more likely to call Peter the High King and his mighty consorts down from the high past .
But in either case , I do not think we can be sure that the help will come to this very spot ---- "
" You never said a truer word , " put in Trumpkin .
" I think , " went on the learned man , " that they -- or he -- will come back to one or other of the Ancient Places of Narnia .
This , where we now sit , is the most ancient and most deeply magical of all , and here , I think , the answer is likeliest to come .
But there are two others .
One is Lantern Waste , up-river , west of Beaversdam , where the Royal Children first appeared in Narnia , as the records tell .
The other is down at the river - mouth , where their castle of Cair Paravel once stood .
And if Aslan himself comes , that would be the best place for meeting him too , for every story says that he is the son of the great Emperor - over-Sea , and over the sea he will pass .
I should like very much to send messengers to both places , to Lantern Waste and the river - mouth , to receive them -- or him -- or it . "
" Just as I thought , " muttered Trumpkin .
" The first result of all this foolery is not to bring us help but to lose us two fighters . "
" Who would you think of sending , Doctor Cornelius ? " asked Caspian .
" Squirrels are best for getting through enemy country without being caught , " said Trufflehunter .
" All our squirrels ( and we have n't many ) , " said Nikabrik , " are rather flighty .
The only one I 'd trust on a job like that would be Pattertwig . "
" Let it be Pattertwig , then , " said King Caspian .
" And who for our other messenger ?
I know you 'd go , Trufflehunter , but you have n't the speed .
Nor you , Doctor Cornelius . "
" I wo n't go , " said Nikabrik .
" With all these Humans and beasts about , there must be a Dwarf here to see that the Dwarfs are fairly treated . "
" Thimbles and thunderstorms ! " cried Trumpkin in a rage .
" Is that how you speak to the King ?
Send me , Sire , I 'll go . "
" But I thought you did n't believe in the Horn , Trumpkin , " said Caspian .
" No more I do , your Majesty .
But what 's that got to do with it ?
I might as well die on a wild goose chase as die here .
You are my King .
I know the difference between giving advice and taking orders .
You 've had my advice , and now it 's the time for orders . "
" I will never forget this , Trumpkin , " said Caspian .
" Send for Pattertwig , one of you .
And when shall I blow the Horn ? "
" I would wait for sunrise , your Majesty , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" That sometimes has an effect in operations of White Magic . "
A few minutes later Pattertwig arrived and had his task explained to him .
As he was , like many squirrels , full of courage and dash and energy and excitement and mischief ( not to say conceit ) , he no sooner heard it than he was eager to be off .
It was arranged that he should run for Lantern Waste while Trumpkin made the shorter journey to the river - mouth .
After a hasty meal they both set off with the fervent thanks and good wishes of the King , the Badger , and Cornelius .