" and so , " said Trumpkin ( for , as you have realised , it was he who had been telling all this story to the four children , sitting on the grass in the ruined hall of Cair Paravel ) -- " and so I put a crust or two in my pocket , left behind all weapons but my dagger , and took to the woods in the grey of the morning .
I 'd been plugging away for many hours when there came a sound that I 'd never heard the like of in my born days .
Eh , I wo n't forget that .
The whole air was full of it , loud as thunder but far longer , cool and sweet as music over water , but strong enough to shake the woods .
And I said to myself , ' If that 's not the Horn , call me a rabbit .
' And a moment later I wondered why he had n't blown it sooner ---- "
" What time was it ? " asked Edmund .
" Between nine and ten of the clock , " said Trumpkin .
" Just when we were at the railway station ! " said all the children , and looked at one another with shining eyes .
" Please go on , " said Lucy to the Dwarf .
" Well , as I was saying , I wondered , but I went on as hard as I could pelt .
I kept on all night -- and then , when it was half light this morning , as if I 'd no more sense than a Giant , I risked a short cut across open country to cut off a big loop of the river , and was caught .
Not by the army , but by a pompous old fool who has charge of a little castle which is Miraz 's last stronghold towards the coast .
I need n't tell you they got no true tale out of me , but I was a Dwarf and that was enough .
But , lobsters and lollipops ! it is a good thing the seneschal _was_ a pompous fool .
Anyone else would have run me through there and then .
But nothing would do for him short of a grand execution : sending me down ' to the ghosts ' in the full ceremonial way .
And then this young lady " ( he nodded at Susan ) " does her bit of archery -- and it was pretty shooting , let me tell you -- and here we are .
And without my armour , for of course they took that . "
He knocked out and refilled his pipe .
" Great Scott ! " said Peter .
" So it was the horn -- your own horn , Su -- that dragged us all off that seat on the platform yesterday morning !
I can hardly believe it ; yet it all fits in . "
" I do n't know why you should n't believe it , " said Lucy , " if you believe in magic at all .
Are n't there lots of stories about magic forcing people out of one place -- out of one world -- into another ?
I mean , when a magician in _The Arabian Nights_ calls up a Jinn , it has to come .
We had to come , just like that . "
" Yes , " said Peter , " I suppose what makes it feel so queer is that in the stories it 's always someone in our world who does the calling .
One does n't really think about where the Jinn 's coming _from_ . "
" And now we know what it feels like for the Jinn , " said Edmund with a chuckle .
" Golly !
It 's a bit uncomfortable to know that _we_ can be whistled for like that .
It 's worse than what Father says about living at the mercy of the telephone . "
" But we want to be here , do n't we , " said Lucy , " if Aslan wants us ? "
" Meanwhile , " said the Dwarf , " what are we to do ?
I suppose I 'd better go back to King Caspian and tell him no help has come . "
" No help ? " said Susan .
" But it has worked .
And here we are . "
" Um -- um -- yes , to be sure .
I see that , " said the Dwarf , whose pipe seemed to be blocked ( at any rate he made himself very busy cleaning it ) .
" But -- well -- I mean ---- "
" But do n't you yet see who we are ? " shouted Lucy .
" You _are_ stupid . "
" I suppose you are the four children out of the old stories , " said Trumpkin .
" And I 'm very glad to meet you of course .
And it 's very interesting , no doubt .
But -- no offence ? "
-- and he hesitated again .
" Do get on and say whatever you 're going to say , " said Edmund .
" Well , then -- no offence , " said Trumpkin .
" But , you know , the King and Trufflehunter and Doctor Cornelius were expecting -- well , if you see what I mean , help .
To put it in another way , I think they 'd been imagining you as great warriors .
As it is -- we 're awfully fond of children and all that , but just at the moment , in the middle of a war -- but I 'm sure you understand . "
" You mean you think we 're no good , " said Edmund , getting red in the face .
" Now pray do n't be offended , " interrupted the Dwarf .
" I assure you , my dear little friends ---- "
" _Little_ from you is really a bit too much , " said Edmund , jumping up .
" I suppose you do n't believe we won the Battle of Beruna ?
Well , you can say what you like about me because I know ---- "
" There 's no good losing our tempers , " said Peter .
" Let 's fit him out with fresh armour and fit ourselves out from the treasure chamber , and have a talk after that . "
" I do n't quite see the point ---- " began Edmund , but Lucy whispered in his ear , " Had n't we better do what Peter says ?
He is the High King , you know .
And I think he has an idea . "
So Edmund agreed and by the aid of his torch they all , including Trumpkin , went down the steps again into the dark coldness and dusty splendour of the treasure house .
The Dwarf 's eyes glistened as he saw the wealth that lay on the shelves ( though it had to stand on tiptoes to do so ) and he muttered to himself , " It would never do to let Nikabrik see this ; never . "
They found easily enough a mail shirt for him , a sword , a helmet , a shield , a bow and quiverful of arrows , all of dwarfish size .
The helmet was of copper , set with rubies , and there was gold on the hilt of the sword : Trumpkin had never seen , much less carried , so much wealth in all his life .
The children also put on mail shirts and helmets ; a sword and shield were found for Edmund and a bow for Lucy -- Peter and Susan were of course already carrying their gifts .
As they came back up the stairway , jingling in their mail , and already looking and feeling more like Narnians and less like school - children , the two boys were behind , apparently making some plan .
Lucy heard Edmund say , " No , let me do it .
It will be more of a sucks for him if I win , and less of a let - down for us all if I fail . "
" All right , Ed , " said Peter .
When they came out into the daylight Edmund turned to the Dwarf very politely and said , " I 've got something to ask you .
Kids like us do n't often have the chance of meeting a great warrior like you .
Would you have a little fencing match with me ?
It would be frightfully decent . "
" But , lad , " said Trumpkin , " these swords are sharp . "
" I know , " said Edmund .
" But I 'll never get anywhere near you and you 'll be quite clever enough to disarm me without doing me any damage . "
" It 's a dangerous game , " said Trumpkin .
" But since you make such a point of it , I 'll try a pass or two . "
Both swords were out in a moment and the three others jumped off the dais and stood watching .
It was well worth it .
It was not like the silly fighting you see with broad swords on the stage .
It was not even like the rapier fighting which you sometimes see rather better done .
This was real broad - sword fighting .
The great thing is to slash at your enemy 's legs and feet because they are the part that have no armour .
And when he slashes at yours you jump with both feet off the ground so that his blow goes under them .
This gave the Dwarf an advantage because Edmund , being much taller , had to be always stooping .
I do n't think Edmund would have had a chance if he had fought Trumpkin twenty - four hours earlier .
But the air of Narnia had been working upon him ever since they arrived on the island , and all his old battles came back to him , and his arms and fingers remembered their old skill .
He was King Edmund once more .
Round and round the two combatants circled , stroke after stroke they gave , and Susan ( who never could learn to like this sort of thing ) shouted out , " Oh , _do_ be careful . "
And then , so quickly that no one ( unless they knew , as Peter did ) could quite see how it happened , Edmund flashed his sword round with a peculiar twist , the Dwarf 's sword flew out of his grip , and Trumpkin was wringing his empty hand as you do after a " sting " from a cricket - bat .
" Not hurt , I hope , my dear little friend ? " said Edmund , panting a little and returning his own sword to its sheath .
" I see the point , " said Trumpkin drily .
" You know a trick I never learned . "
" That 's quite true , " put in Peter .
" The best swordsman in the world may be disarmed by a trick that 's new to him .
I think it 's only fair to give Trumpkin a chance at something else .
Will you have a shooting match with my sister ?
There are no tricks in archery , you know . "
" Ah , you 're jokers , you are , " said the Dwarf .
" I begin to see .
As if I did n't know how she can shoot , after what happened this morning .
All the same , I 'll have a try . "
He spoke gruffly , but his eyes brightened , for he was a famous bowman among his own people .
All five of them came out into the courtyard .
" What 's to be the target ? " asked Peter .
" I think that apple hanging over the wall on the branch there would do , " said Susan .
" That 'll do nicely , lass , " said Trumpkin .
" You mean the yellow one near the middle of the arch ? "
" No , not that , " said Susan .
" The red one up above -- over the battlement . "
The Dwarf 's face fell .
" Looks more like a cherry than an apple , " he muttered , but he said nothing out loud .
They tossed up for first shot ( greatly to the interest of Trumpkin , who had never seen a coin tossed before ) and Susan lost .
They were to shoot from the top of the steps that led from the hall into the courtyard .
Everyone could see from the way the Dwarf took his position and handled the bow that he knew what he was about .
Twang went the string .
It was an excellent shot .
The tiny apple shook as the arrow passed , and a leaf came fluttering down .
Then Susan went to the top of the steps and strung her bow .
She was not enjoying her match half so much as Edmund had enjoyed his ; not because she had any doubt about hitting the apple but because Susan was so tender - hearted that she almost hated to beat someone who had been beaten already .
The Dwarf watched her keenly as she drew the shaft to her ear .
A moment later , with a little soft thump which they could all hear in that quiet place , the apple fell to the grass with Susan 's arrow in it .
" Oh , well done , Su , " shouted the other children .
" It was n't really any better than yours , " said Susan to the Dwarf .
" I think there was a tiny breath of wind as you shot . "
" No there was n't , " said Trumpkin .
" Do n't tell me .
I know when I am fairly beaten .
I wo n't even say that the scar of my last wound catches me a bit when I get my arm well back ---- "
" Oh , are you wounded ? " asked Lucy .
" Do let me look . "
" It 's not a sight for little girls , " began Trumpkin , but then he suddenly checked himself .
" There I go talking like a fool again , " he said .
" I suppose you 're as likely to be a great surgeon as your brother was to be a great swordsman or your sister to be a great archer . "
He sat down on the steps and took off his hauberk and slipped down his little shirt , showing an arm hairy and muscular ( in proportion ) as a sailor 's though not much bigger than a child 's .
There was a clumsy bandage on the shoulder which Lucy proceeded to unroll .
Underneath , the cut looked very nasty and there was a good deal of swelling .
" Oh , poor Trumpkin , " said Lucy .
" How horrid . "
Then she carefully dripped on to it one single drop of the cordial from her flask .
" Hullo .
Eh ?
What have you done ? " said Trumpkin .
But however he turned his head and squinted and whisked his beard to and fro , he could n't quite see his own shoulder .
Then he felt it as well as he could , getting his arms and fingers into very difficult positions as you do when you 're trying to scratch a place that is just out of reach .
Then he swung his arm and raised it and tried the muscles , and finally jumped to his feet crying , " Giants and junipers !
It 's cured !
It 's as good as new . "
After that he burst into a great laugh and said , " Well , I 've made as big a fool of myself as ever a Dwarf did .
No offence , I hope ?
My humble duty to your Majesties all -- humble duty .
And thanks for my life , my cure , my breakfast -- and my lesson . "
The children all said it was quite all right and not to mention it .
" And now , " said Peter , " if you 've really decided to believe in us ---- "
" I have , " said the Dwarf .
" It 's quite clear what we have to do .
We must join King Caspian at once . "
" The sooner the better , " said Trumpkin .
" My being such a fool has already wasted about an hour . "
" It 's about two days ' journey , the way you came , " said Peter .
" For us , I mean .
We ca n't walk all day and night like you Dwarfs . "
Then he turned to the others .
" What Trumpkin calls Aslan 's How is obviously the Stone Table itself .
You remember it was about half a day 's march , or a little less , from there down to the Fords of Beruna ---- "
" Beruna 's Bridge , we call it , " said Trumpkin .
" There was no bridge in our time , " said Peter .
" And then from Beruna down to here was another day and a bit .
We used to get home about teatime on the second day , going easily .
Going hard , we could do the whole thing in a day and a half perhaps . "
" But remember it 's all woods now , " said Trumpkin , " and there are enemies to dodge . "
" Look here , " said Edmund , " need we go by the same way that Our Dear Little Friend came ? "
" No more of that , your Majesty , if you love me , " said the Dwarf .
" Very well , " said Edmund .
" May I say our D.L.F .? "
" Oh , Edmund , " said Susan .
" Do n't keep _on_ at him like that . "
" That 's all right , lass -- I mean your Majesty , " said Trumpkin with a chuckle .
" A jibe wo n't raise a blister . "
( And after that they often called him the D.L.F. till they 'd almost forgotten what it meant . )
" As I was saying , " continued Edmund , " we need n't go that way .
Why should n't we row a little south till we come to Glasswater Creek and row up it ?
That brings us up behind the Hill of the Stone Table , and we 'll be safe while we 're at sea .
If we start at once , we can be at the head of Glasswater before dark , get a few hours ' sleep , and be with Caspian pretty early to - morrow . "
" What a thing it is to know the coast , " said Trumpkin .
" None of us know anything about Glasswater . "
" What about food ? " asked Susan .
" Oh , we 'll have to do with apples , " said Lucy .
" Do let 's get on .
We 've done nothing yet , and we 've been here nearly two days . "
" And anyway , no one 's going to have my hat for a fish - basket again , " said Edmund .
They used one of the raincoats as a kind of bag and put a good many apples in it .
Then they all had a good long drink at the well ( for they would meet no more fresh water till they landed at the head of the Creek ) and went down to the boat .
The children were sorry to leave Cair Paravel , which , even in ruins , had begun to feel like home again .
" The D.L.F. had better steer , " said Peter , " and Ed and I will take an oar each .
Half a moment , though .
We 'd better take off our mail : we 're going to be pretty warm before we 're done .
The girls had better be in the bows and shout directions to the D.L.F. because he does n't know the way .
You 'd better get us a fair way out to sea till we 've passed the island . "
And soon the green , wooded coast of the island was falling away behind them , and its little bays and headlands were beginning to look flatter , and the boat was rising and falling in the gentle swell .
The sea began to grow bigger around them and , in the distance , bluer , but close round the boat it was green and bubbly .
Everything smelled salt and there was no noise except the swishing of water and the clop - clop of water against the sides and the splash of the oars and the jolting noise of the rowlocks .
The sun grew hot .
It was delightful for Lucy and Susan in the bows , bending over the edge and trying to get their hands in the sea which they could never quite reach .
The bottom , mostly pure , pale sand but with occasional patches of purple seaweed , could be seen beneath them .
" It 's like old times , " said Lucy .
" Do you remember our voyage to Terebinthia -- and Galma -- and Seven Isles -- and the Lone Islands ? "
" Yes , " said Susan , " and our great ship the _Splendour Hyaline_ , with the swan 's head at her prow and the carved swan 's wings coming back almost to her waist ? "
" And the silken sails , and the great stern lanterns ? "
" And the feasts on the poop and the musicians . "
" Do you remember when we had the musicians up in the rigging playing flutes so that it sounded like music out of the sky ? "
Presently Susan took over Edmund 's oar and he came forward to join Lucy .
They had passed the island now and stood closer in to the shore -- all wooded and deserted .
They would have thought it very pretty if they had not remembered the time when it was open and breezy and full of merry friends .
" Phew !
This is pretty gruelling work , " said Peter .
" Ca n't I row for a bit ? " said Lucy .
" The oars are too big for you , " said Peter shortly , not because he was cross but because he had no strength to spare for talking .