" Land in sight , " shouted the man in the bows .
Lucy , who had been talking to Rhince on the poop , came pattering down the ladder and raced forward .
As she went she was joined by Edmund , and they found Caspian , Drinian and Reepicheep already on the forecastle .
It was a coldish morning , the sky very pale and the sea very dark blue with little white caps of foam , and there , a little way off on the starboard bow , was the nearest of the Lone Islands , Felimath , like a low green hill in the sea , and behind it , further off , the grey slopes of its sister Doorn .
" Same old Felimath !
Same old Doorn , " said Lucy , clapping her hands .
" Oh -- Edmund , how long it is since you and I saw them last ! "
" I 've never understood why they belong to Narnia , " said Caspian .
" Did Peter the High King conquer them ? "
" Oh no , " said Edmund .
" They were Narnian before our time -- in the days of the White Witch . "
( By the way , I have never yet heard how these remote islands became attached to the crown of Narnia ; if I ever do , and if the story is at all interesting , I may put it in some other book . )
" Are we to put in here , Sire ? " asked Drinian .
" I should n't think it would be much good landing on Felimath , " said Edmund .
" It was almost uninhabited in our days and it looks as if it was the same still .
The people lived mostly on Doorn and a little on Avra -- that 's the third one ; you ca n't see it yet .
They only kept sheep on Felimath . "
" Then we 'll have to double that cape , I suppose , " said Drinian , " and land on Doorn .
That 'll mean rowing . "
" I 'm sorry we 're not landing on Felimath , " said Lucy .
" I 'd like to walk there again .
It was so lonely -- a nice kind of loneliness , and all grass and clover and soft sea air . "
" I 'd love to stretch my legs too , " said Caspian .
" I tell you what .
Why should n't we go ashore in the boat and send it back , and then we could walk across Felimath and let the _Dawn Treader_ pick us up on the other side ? "
If Caspian had been as experienced then as he became later on in this voyage he would not have made this suggestion ; but at the moment it seemed an excellent one .
" Oh do let 's , " said Lucy .
" You 'll come , will you ? " said Caspian to Eustace , who had come on deck with his hand bandaged .
" Anything to get off this blasted boat , " said Eustace .
" Blasted ? " said Drinian .
" How do you mean ? "
" In a civilised country like where I come from , " said Eustace , " the ships are so big that when you 're inside you would n't know you were at sea at all . "
" In that case you might just as well stay ashore , " said Caspian .
" Will you tell them to lower the boat , Drinian . "
The King , the Mouse , the two Pevensies , and Eustace all got into the boat and were pulled to the beach of Felimath .
When the boat had left them and was being rowed back they all turned and looked round .
They were surprised at how small the _Dawn Treader_ looked .
Lucy was of course barefoot , having kicked off her shoes while swimming , but that is no hardship if one is going to walk on downy turf .
It was delightful to be ashore again and to smell the earth and grass , even if at first the ground seemed to be pitching up and down like a ship , as it usually does for a while if one has been at sea .
It was much warmer here than it had been on board and Lucy found the sand pleasant to her feet as they crossed it .
There was a lark singing .
They struck inland and up a fairly steep , though low , hill .
At the top of course they looked back , and there was the _Dawn Treader_ shining like a great bright insect and crawling slowly north - westward with her oars .
Then they went over the ridge and could see her no longer .
Doorn now lay before them , divided from Felimath by a channel about a mile wide ; behind it and to the left lay Avra .
The little white town of Narrowhaven on Doorn was easily seen .
" Hullo !
What 's this ? " said Edmund suddenly .
In the green valley to which they were descending six or seven rough - looking men , all armed , were sitting by a tree .
" Do n't tell them who we are , " said Caspian .
" And pray , your Majesty , why not ? " said Reepicheep who had consented to ride on Lucy 's shoulder .
" It just occurred to me , " replied Caspian , " that no one here can have heard from Narnia for a long time .
It 's just possible they may not still acknowledge our over-lordship .
In which case it might not be quite safe to be known as the King . "
" We have our swords , Sire , " said Reepicheep .
" Yes , Reep , I know we have , " said Caspian .
" But if it is a question of re-conquering the three islands , I 'd prefer to come back with a rather larger army . "
By this time they were quite close to the strangers , one of whom -- a big black - haired fellow -- shouted out , " A good morning to you . "
" And a good morning to you , " said Caspian .
" Is there still a Governor of the Lone Islands ? "
" To be sure there is , " said the man , " Governor Gumpas .
His Sufficiency is at Narrowhaven .
But you 'll stay and drink with us . "
Caspian thanked him , though neither he nor the others much liked the look of their new acquaintance , and all of them sat down .
But hardly had they raised their cups to their lips when the black - haired man nodded to his companions and , as quick as lightning , all the five visitors found themselves wrapped in strong arms .
There was a moment 's struggle but all the advantages were on one side , and soon everyone was disarmed and had their hands tied behind their backs -- except Reepicheep , writhing in his captor 's grip and biting furiously .
" Careful with that beast , Tacks , " said the Leader .
" Do n't damage him .
He 'll fetch the best price of the lot , I should n't wonder . "
" Coward !
Poltroon ! " squeaked Reepicheep .
" Give me my sword and free my paws if you dare . "
" Whew ! " whistled the slave merchant ( for that is what he was ) .
" It can talk !
Well I never did .
Blowed if I take less than two hundred crescents for him . "
The Calormen crescent , which is the chief coin in those parts , is worth about a third of a pound .
" So that 's what you are , " said Caspian .
" A kidnapper and slaver .
I hope you 're proud of it . "
" Now , now , now , now , " said the slaver .
" Do n't you start any jaw .
The easier you take it , the pleasanter all round , see ?
I do n't do this for fun .
I 've got my living to make same as anyone else . "
" Where will you take us ? " asked Lucy , getting the words out with some difficulty .
" Over to Narrowhaven , " said the slaver .
" For market to - morrow . "
" Is there a British Consul there ? " asked Eustace .
" Is there a which ? " said the man .
But long before Eustace was tired of trying to explain , the slaver simply said , " Well , I 've had enough of this jabber .
The Mouse is a fair treat but this one would talk the hind leg off a donkey .
Off we go , mates . "
Then the four human prisoners were roped together , not cruelly but securely , and made to march down to the shore .
Reepicheep was carried .
He had stopped biting on a threat of having his mouth tied up , but he had a great deal to say , and Lucy really wondered how any man could bear to have the things said to him which were said to the slave dealer by the Mouse .
But the slave dealer , far from objecting , only said " Go on " whenever Reepicheep paused for breath , occasionally adding , " It 's as good as a play " , or , " Blimey , you ca n't help almost thinking it knows what it 's saying ! " or " Was it one of you what trained it ? "
This so infuriated Reepicheep that in the end the number of things he thought of saying all at once nearly suffocated him and he became silent .
When they got down to the shore that looked towards Doorn they found a little village and a long - boat on the beach and , lying a little further out , a dirty bedraggled looking ship .
" Now , youngsters , " said the slave dealer , " let 's have no fuss and then you 'll have nothing to cry about .
All aboard . "
At that moment a fine - looking bearded man came out of one of the houses ( an inn , I think ) and said :
" Well , Pug .
More of your usual wares ? "
The slaver , whose name seemed to be Pug , bowed very low , and said in a wheedling kind of voice , " Yes , please your Lordship . "
" How much do you want for that boy ? " asked the other , pointing to Caspian .
" Ah , " said Pug , " I knew your Lordship would pick on the best .
No deceiving your Lordship with anything second rate .
That boy , now , I 've taken a fancy to him myself .
Got kind of fond of him , I have .
I 'm that tender - hearted I did n't ever ought to have taken up this job .
Still , to a customer like your Lordship ---- "
" Tell me your price , carrion , " said the Lord sternly .
" Do you think I want to listen to the rigmarole of your filthy trade ? "
" Three hundred crescents , my Lord , to your honourable Lordship , but to anyone else ---- "
" I 'll give you a hundred and fifty . "
" Oh please , please , " broke in Lucy .
" Do n't separate us , whatever you do .
You do n't know ---- " But then she stopped for she saw that Caspian did n't even now want to be known .
" A hundred and fifty , then , " said the Lord .
" As for you , little maiden , I am sorry I can not buy you all .
Unrope my boy , Pug .
And look -- treat these others well while they are in your hands or it 'll be the worse for you . "
" Well ! " said Pug .
" Now who ever heard of a gentleman in my way of business who treated his stock better than what I do ?
Well ?
Why , I treat 'em like my own children . "
" That 's likely enough to be true , " said the other grimly .
The dreadful moment had now come .
Caspian was untied and his new master said , " This way , lad , " and Lucy burst into tears and Edmund looked very blank .
But Caspian looked over his shoulder and said , " Cheer up .
I 'm sure it will come all right in the end .
So long . "
" Now , missie , " said Pug .
" Do n't you start taking on and spoiling your looks for the market to - morrow .
You be a good girl and then you wo n't have nothing to cry about , see ? "
Then they were rowed out to the slave - ship and taken below into a long , rather dark place , none too clean , where they found many other unfortunate prisoners ; for Pug was of course a pirate and had just returned from cruising among the islands and capturing what he could .
The children did n't meet anyone whom they knew ; the prisoners were mostly Galmians and Terebinthians .
And there they sat in the straw and wondered what was happening to Caspian and tried to stop Eustace talking as if everyone except himself was to blame .
Meanwhile Caspian was having a much more interesting time .
The man who had bought him led him down a little lane between two of the village houses and so out into an open place behind the village .
Then he turned and faced him .
" You need n't be afraid of me , boy , " he said .
" I 'll treat you well .
I bought you for your face .
You reminded me of someone . "
" May I ask of whom , my Lord ? " said Caspian .
" You remind me of my master , King Caspian of Narnia . "
Then Caspian decided to risk everything on one stroke .
" My Lord , " he said , " I am your master .
I am Caspian , King of Narnia . "
" You make very free , " said the other .
" How shall I know this is true ? "
" Firstly by my face , " said Caspian .
" Secondly because I know within six guesses who you are .
You are one of those seven lords of Narnia whom my Uncle Miraz sent to sea and whom I have come out to look for -- Argoz , Bern , Octesian , Restimar , Mavramorn , or -- or -- I have forgotten the other .
And finally , if your Lordship will give me a sword I will prove on any man 's body in clean battle that I am Caspian the son of Caspian , lawful king of Narnia , Lord of Cair Paravel , and Emperor of the Lone Islands . "
" By heaven , " exclaimed the man , " it is his father 's very voice and trick of speech .
My liege -- your majesty ---- " And there in the field he knelt and kissed the King 's hand .
" The moneys your Lordship disbursed for our person will be made good from our own treasury , " said Caspian .
" They 're not in Pug 's purse yet , Sire , " said the Lord Bern , for he it was .
" And never will be , I trust .
I have moved his Sufficiency the Governor a hundred times to crush this vile traffic in man 's flesh . "
" My Lord Bern , " said Caspian , " we must talk of the state of these Islands .
But first what is your Lordship 's own story ? "
" Short enough , Sire , " said Bern .
" I came thus far with my six fellows , loved a girl of the islands , and felt I had had enough of the sea .
And there was no purpose in returning to Narnia while your Majesty 's uncle held the reins .
So I married and have lived here ever since . "
" And what is this governor , this Gumpas , like ?
Does he still acknowledge the King of Narnia for his lord ? "
" In words , yes .
All is done in the King 's name .
But he would not be best pleased to find a real , live King of Narnia coming in upon him .
And if your Majesty came before him alone and unarmed -- well he would not deny his allegiance , but he would pretend to disbelieve you .
Your Grace 's life would be in danger .
What following has your Majesty in these waters ? "
" There is my ship just rounding the point , " said Caspian .
" We are about thirty swords if it came to fighting .
Shall we not have my ship in and fall upon Pug and free my friends whom he holds captive ? "
" Not by my counsel , " said Bern .
" As soon as there was a fight two or three ships would put out from Narrowhaven to rescue Pug .
Your Majesty must work by a show of more power than you really have , and by the terror of the King 's name .
It must not come to plain battle .
Gumpas is a chicken - hearted man and can be over-awed . "
After a little more conversation Caspian and Bern walked down to the coast a little west of the village and there Caspian winded his horn .
( This was not the great magic horn of Narnia , Queen Susan 's Horn : he had left that at home for his regent Trumpkin to use if any great need fell upon the land in the King 's absence . )
Drinian , who was on the look - out for a signal , recognised the royal horn at once and the _Dawn Treader_ began standing in to shore .
Then the boat put off again and in a few moments Caspian and the Lord Bern were on deck explaining the situation to Drinian .
He , just like Caspian , wanted to lay the _Dawn Treader_ alongside the slave - ship at once and board her , but Bern made the same objection .
" Steer straight down this channel , captain , " said Bern , " and then round to Avra where my own estates are .
But first run up the King 's banner , hang out all the shields , and send as many men to the fighting top as you can .
And about five bowshots hence , when you get open sea on your port bow , run up a few signals . "
" Signals ?
To whom ? " said Drinian .
" Why , to all the other ships we have n't got but which it might be well that Gumpas thinks we have . "
" Oh , I see , " said Drinian , rubbing his hands .
" And they 'll read our signals .
What shall I say ?
_Whole fleet found the South of Avra and assemble at ---- _ ? "
" Bernstead , " said the Lord Bern .
" That 'll do excellently .
Their whole journey -- if _there_ were any ships -- would be out of sight from Narrowhaven . "
Caspian was sorry for the others languishing in the hold of Pug 's slave ship , but he could not help finding the rest of that day enjoyable .
Late in the afternoon ( for they had to do all by oar ) , having turned to starboard round the north - east end of Doorn and port again round the point of Avra , they entered into a good harbour on Avra 's southern shore where Bern 's pleasant lands sloped down to the water 's edge .
Bern 's people , many of whom they saw working in the fields , were all freemen and it was a happy and prosperous fief .
Here they all went ashore and were royally feasted in a low , pillared house overlooking the bay .
Bern and his gracious wife and merry daughters made them good cheer .
But after dark Bern sent a messenger over by boat to Doorn to order some preparations ( he did not say exactly what ) for the following day .