When the meal ( which was pigeon pie , cold ham , salad , and cakes ) had been brought , and all had drawn their chairs up to the table and begun , the Knight continued :
" You must understand , friends , that I know nothing of who I was and whence I came into this Dark World .
I remember no time when I was not dwelling , as now , at the court of this all but heavenly Queen ; but my thought is that she saved me from some evil enchantment and brought me hither of her exceeding bounty .
( Honest Frog - foot , your cup is empty .
Suffer me to refill it . )
And this seems to me the likelier because even now I am bound by a spell , from which my Lady alone can free me .
Every night there comes an hour when my mind is most horribly changed , and , after my mind , my body .
For first I become furious and wild and would rush upon my dearest friends to kill them , if I were not bound .
And soon after that , I turn into the likeness of a great serpent , hungry , fierce , and deadly .
( Sir , be pleased to take another breast of pigeon , I entreat you . )
So they tell me , and they certainly speak truth , for my Lady says the same .
I myself know nothing of it , for when my hour is past I awake forgetful of all that vile fit and in my proper shape and sound mind -- saving that I am somewhat wearied .
( Little lady , eat one of these honey cakes , which are brought for me from some barbarous land in the far south of the world . )
Now the Queen 's majesty knows by her art that I shall be freed from this enchantment when once she has made me king of a land in the Overworld and set its crown upon my head .
The land is already chosen and the very place of our breaking out .
Her Earthmen have worked day and night digging a way beneath it , and have now gone so far and so high that they tunnel not a score of feet beneath the very grass on which the Updwellers of that country walk .
It will be very soon now that those Uplanders ' fate will come upon them .
She herself is at the diggings to - night , and I expect a message to go to her .
Then the thin roof of earth which still keeps me from my kingdom will be broken through , and with her to guide me and a thousand Earthmen at my back , I shall ride forth in arms , fall suddenly on our enemies , slay their chief men , cast down their strong places , and doubtless be their crowned king within four and twenty hours . "
" It 's a bit rough luck on them , is n't it ? " said Scrubb .
" Thou art a lad of a wondrous , quick - working wit ! " exclaimed the Knight .
" For , on my honour , I had never thought of it so before .
I see your meaning . "
He looked slightly , very slightly troubled for a moment or two ; but his face soon cleared and he broke out , with another of his loud laughs , " But fie on gravity !
Is it not the most comical and ridiculous thing in the world to think of them all going about their business and never dreaming that under their peaceful fields and floors , only a fathom down , there is a great army ready to break out upon them like a fountain !
And they never to have suspected !
Why , they themselves , when once the first smart of their defeat is over , can hardly choose but laugh at the thought ! "
" I do n't think it 's funny at all , " said Jill .
" I think you 'll be a wicked tyrant . "
" What ? " said the Knight , still laughing and patting her head in a quite infuriating fashion .
" Is our little maid a deep politician ?
But never fear , sweetheart .
In ruling that land , I shall do all by the counsel of my Lady , who will then be my Queen too .
Her word shall be my law , even as my word will be law to the people we have conquered . "
" Where I come from , " said Jill , who was disliking him more every minute , " they do n't think much of men who are bossed about by their wives . "
" Shalt think otherwise when thou hast a man of thine own , I warrant you , " said the Knight , apparently thinking this very funny .
" But with my Lady , it is another matter .
I am well content to live by her word , who has already saved me from a thousand dangers .
No mother has taken pains more tenderly for her child , than the Queen 's grace has for me .
Why , look you , amid all her cares and business , she rideth out with me in the Overworld many a time and oft to accustom my eyes to the sunlight .
And then I must go fully armed and with visor down , so that no man may see my face , and I must speak to no - one .
For she has found out by art magical that this would hinder my deliverance from the grievous enchantment I lie under .
Is not that a lady worthy of a man 's whole worship ? "
" Sounds a very nice lady indeed , " said Puddelglum in a voice which meant exactly the opposite .
They were thoroughly tired of the Knight 's talk before they had finished supper .
Puddleglum was thinking , " I wonder what game that witch is really playing with this young fool . "
Scrubb was thinking , " He 's a great baby , really : tied to that woman 's apron strings ; he 's a sap . "
And Jill was thinking , " He 's the silliest , most conceited , selfish pig I 've met for a long time . "
But when the meal was over , the Knight 's mood had changed .
There was no more laughter about him .
" Friends , " he said , " my hour is now very near .
I am ashamed that you should see me yet I dread being left alone .
They will come in presently and bind me hand and foot to yonder chair .
Alas , so it must be : for in my fury , they tell me , I would destroy all that I could reach . "
" I say , " said Scrubb , " I 'm awfully sorry about your enchantment of course , but what will those fellows do to us when they come to bind you ?
They talked of putting us in prison .
And we do n't like all those dark places very much .
We 'd much rather stay here till you 're ... better ... if we may . "
" It is well thought of , " said the Knight .
" By custom none but the Queen herself remains with me in my evil hour .
Such is her tender care for my honour that she would not willingly suffer any ears but her own to hear the words I utter in that frenzy .
But I could not easily persuade my attendant gnomes that you should be left with me .
And I think I hear their soft feet even now upon the stairs .
Go through yonder door : it leads into my other apartments .
And there , either await my coming when they have unbound me ; or , if you will , return and sit with me in my ravings . "
They followed his directions and passed out of the room by a door which they had not yet seen opened .
It brought them , they were pleased to see , not into darkness but into a lighted corridor .
They tried various doors and found ( what they very badly needed ) water for washing and even a looking glass .
" He never offered us a wash before supper , " said Jill , drying her face .
" Selfish , self-centred pig . "
" Are we going back to watch the enchantment , or shall we stay here ? " said Scrubb .
" Stay here , I vote , " said Jill .
" I 'd much rather not see it . "
But she felt a little inquisitive all the same .
" No , go back , " said Puddleglum .
" We may pick up some information , and we need all we can get .
I am sure that Queen is a witch and an enemy .
And those Earthmen would knock us on the head as soon as look at us .
There 's a stronger smell of danger and lies and magic and treason about this land than I 've ever smelled before .
We need to keep our eyes and ears open . "
They went back down the corridor and gently pushed the door open , " It 's all right , " said Scrubb , meaning that there were no Earthmen about .
Then they all came back into the room where they had supped .
The main door was now shut , concealing the curtain between which they had first entered .
The knight was seated in a curious silver chair , to which he was bound by his ankles , his knees , his elbows , his wrists and his waist .
There was sweat on his forehead and his face was filled with anguish .
" Come in , friends , " he said , glancing quickly up .
" The fit is not yet upon me .
Make no noise , for I told that prying chamberlain that you were in bed .
Now ...
I can feel it coming .
Quick !
Listen while I am master of myself .
When the fit is upon me , it well may be that I shall beg and implore you , with entreaties and threatenings , to loosen my bonds .
They say I do .
I shall call upon you by all that is most dear and most dreadful .
But do not listen to me .
Harden your hearts and stop your ears .
For while I am bound you are safe .
But if once I were up and out of this chair , then first would come my fury , and after that " -- he shuddered -- " the change into a loathsome serpent . "
" There 's no fear of our loosing you , " said Puddleglum .
" We 've no wish to meet wild men ; or serpents either . "
" I should think not , " said Scrubb and Jill together .
" All the same , " added Puddleglum in a whisper .
" Do n't let 's be too sure .
Let 's be on our guard .
We 've muffed everything else , you know .
He 'll be cunning , I should n't wonder , once he gets started .
Can we trust one another ?
Do we all promise that whatever he says we do n't touch those cords ?
_Whatever_ he says , mind you ? "
" Rather ! " said Scrubb .
" There 's nothing in the world he can say or do that 'll make me change my mind , " said Jill .
" Hush !
Something 's happening , " said Puddleglum .
The Knight was moaning .
His face was as pale as putty , and he writhed in his bonds .
And whether because she was sorry for him , or for some other reason , Jill thought that he looked a nicer sort of man than he had looked before .
" Ah , " he groaned .
" Enchantments , enchantments ... the heavy , tangled , cold , clammy web of evil magic .
Buried alive .
Dragged down under the earth , down into the sooty blackness ... how many years is it ?
... Have I lived ten years , or a thousand years , in the pit ?
Maggotmen all around me .
Oh , have mercy .
Let me out , let me go back .
Let me feel the wind and see the sky ...
There used to be a little pool .
When you looked down into it you could see all the trees growing upside - down in the water , all green , and below them , deep , very deep , the blue sky . "
He had been speaking in a low voice ; now he looked up , fixed his eyes upon them , and said loud and clear :
" Quick !
I am sane now .
Every night I am sane .
If only I could get out of this enchanted chair , it would last .
I should be a man again .
But every night they bind me , and so every night my chance is gone .
But you are not enemies .
I am not _your_ prisoner .
Quick !
Cut these cords . "
" Stand fast !
Steady , " said Puddleglum to the two children .
" I beseech you to hear me , " said the Knight , forcing himself to speak calmly .
" Have they told you that if I am released from this chair I shall kill you and become a serpent ?
I see by your faces that they have .
It is a lie .
It is at this hour that I am in my right mind : it is all the rest of the day that I am enchanted .
You are not Earthmen nor witches .
Why should you be on their side ?
Of your courtesy , cut my bonds . "
" Steady !
Steady !
Steady ! " said the three travellers to one another .
" Oh , you have hearts of stone , " said the Knight .
" Believe me , you look upon a wretch who has suffered almost more than any mortal heart can bear .
What wrong have I ever done you , that you should side with my enemies to keep me in such miseries ?
And the minutes are slipping past .
_Now_ you can save me ; when this hour has passed , I shall be witless again -- the toy and lap - dog , nay , more likely the pawn and tool , of the most devilish sorceress that ever planned the woe of men .
And this night , of all nights , when she is away !
You take from me a chance that may never come again . "
" This is dreadful .
I do wish we 'd stayed away till it was over , " said Jill .
" Steady ! " said Puddleglum .
The prisoner 's voice was now rising into a shriek .
" Let me go , I say .
Give me my sword .
My sword !
Once I am free I shall take such revenge on Earthmen that Underland will talk of it for a thousand years ! "
" Now the frenzy is beginning , " said Scrubb .
" I hope those knots are all right . "
" Yes , " said Puddleglum .
" He 'd have twice his natural strength if he got free now .
And I 'm not clever with my sword .
He 'd get us both , I should n't wonder ; and then Pole on her own would be left to tackle the snake . "
The prisoner was now so straining at his bonds that they cut into his wrists and ankles .
" Beware , " he said .
" Beware .
One night I _did_ break them .
But the witch was there that time .
You will not have her to help you to - night .
Free me now , and I am your friend .
I 'm your mortal enemy else . "
" Cunning , is n't he ? " said Puddleglum .
" Once and for all , " said the prisoner , " I adjure you to set me free .
By all fears and all loves , by the bright skies of Overland , by the great Lion , by Aslan himself , I charge you ---- "
" Oh ! " cried the three travellers as though they had been hurt .
" It 's the sign , " said Puddleglum .
" It was the _words_ of the sign , " said Scrubb more cautiously .
" Oh , what _are_ we to do ? " said Jill .
It was a dreadful question .
What had been the use of promising one another that they would not on any account set the Knight free , if they were now to do so the first time he happened to call upon a name they really cared about ?
On the other hand , what had been the use of learning the signs if they were n't going to obey them ?
Yet could Aslan have really meant them to unbind anyone -- even a lunatic -- who asked it in his name ?
Could it be a mere accident ?
Or how if the Queen of the Underworld knew all about the signs and had made the Knight learn this name simply in order to entrap them ?
But then , supposing this was the real sign ?
... They had muffed three already ; they dare n't muff the fourth .
" Oh , if only we knew ! " said Jill .
" I think we do know , " said Puddleglum .
" Do you mean you think everything will come right if we do untie him ? " said Scrubb .
" I do n't know about that , " said Puddleglum .
" You see , Aslan did n't tell Pole what would happen .
He only told her what to do .
That fellow will be the death of us once he 's up , I should n't wonder .
But that does n't let us off following the sign . "
They all stood looking at one another with bright eyes .
It was a sickening moment .
" All right ! " said Jill suddenly .
" Let 's get it over .
Good - bye , everyone ...! "
They all shook hands .
The Knight was screaming by now ; there was foam on his cheeks .
" Come on , Scrubb , " said Puddleglum .
He and Scrubb drew their swords and went over to the captive .
" In the name of Aslan , " they said and began methodically cutting the cords .
The instant the prisoner was free , he crossed the room in a single bound , seized his own sword ( which had been taken from him and laid on the table ) , and drew it .
" You first ! " he cried and fell upon the silver chair .
That must have been a good sword .
The silver gave way before its edge like string , and in a moment a few twisted fragments , shining on the floor , were all that was left .
But as the chair broke , there came from it a bright flash , a sound like small thunder , and ( for one moment ) a loathsome smell .
" Lie there , vile engine of sorcery , " he said , " lest your mistress should ever use you for another victim . "
Then he turned and surveyed his rescuers ; and the something wrong , whatever it was , had vanished from his face .
" What ? " he cried , turning to Puddleglum .
" Do I see before me a Marsh - wiggle -- a real , live , honest , Narnian Marsh - wiggle ? "
" Oh , so you _have_ heard of Narnia after all ? " said Jill .
" Had I forgotten it when I was under the spell ? " asked the Knight .
" Well , that and all other bedevilments are now over .
You may well believe that I know Narnia , for I am Rilian , Prince of Narnia , and Caspian the great King is my father . "
" Your Royal Highness , " said Puddleglum , sinking on one knee ( and the children did the same ) , " we have come hither for no other end than to seek you . "
" And who are you , my other deliverers ? " said the Prince to Scrubb and Jill .
" We were sent by Aslan himself from beyond the world 's end to seek your Highness , " said Scrubb .
" I am Eustace who sailed with him to the island of Ramandu . "
" I owe all three of you a greater debt than I can ever pay , " said Prince Rilian .
" But my father ?
Is he yet alive ? "
" He sailed east again before we left Narnia , my lord , " said Puddleglum .
" But your Highness must consider that the King is very old .
It is ten to one his Majesty must die on the voyage . "
" He is old , you say .
How long then have I been in the power of the witch ? "
" It is more than ten years since your Highness was lost in the woods at the north side of Narnia . "
" Ten years ! " said the Prince , drawing his hand across his face as if to rub away the past .
" Yes , I believe you .
For now that I am myself I can remember that enchanted life , though while I was enchanted I could not remember my true self .
And now , fair friends -- but wait !
I hear their feet ( does it not sicken a man , that padding woolly tread ! faugh ! ) on the stairs .
Lock the door , boy .
Or stay .
I have a better thought than that .
I will fool these Earthmen , if Aslan gives me the wit .
Take your cue from me . "
He walked resolutely to the door and flung it wide open .