Jill was asleep .
Ever since the owls ' parliament began she had been yawning terribly and now she had dropped off .
She was not at all pleased at being waked again , and at finding herself lying on bare boards in a dusty belfry sort of place , completely dark , and almost completely full of owls .
She was even less pleased when she heard that they had to set off for somewhere else -- and not , apparently , for bed -- on the Owl 's back .
" Oh , come on , Pole , buck up , " said Scrubb 's voice .
" After all , it is an adventure . "
" I 'm sick of adventures , " said Jill crossly .
She did , however , consent to climb onto Glimfeather 's back , and was thoroughly waked up ( for a while ) by the unexpected coldness of the air when he flew out with her into the night .
The moon had disappeared and there were no stars .
Far behind her she could see a single lighted window well above the ground ; doubtless , in one of the towers of Cair Paravel .
It made her long to be back in that delightful bedroom , snug in bed , watching the firelight on the walls .
She put her hands under her cloak and wrapped it tightly round her .
It was uncanny to hear two voices in the dark air a little distance away ; Scrubb and his owl were talking to one another .
" He does n't sound tired , " thought Jill .
She did not realise that he had been on great adventures in that world before and that the Narnian air was bringing back to him a strength he had won when he sailed the Eastern Seas with King Caspian .
Jill had to pinch herself to keep awake , for she knew that if she dozed on Glimfeather 's back she would probably fall off .
When at last the two owls ended their flight , she climbed stiffly off Glimfeather and found herself on flat ground .
A chilly wind was blowing and they appeared to be in a place without trees .
" Tu - whoo , tu - whoo ! "
Glimfeather was calling .
" Wake up , Puddleglum .
Wake up .
It is on the Lion 's business . "
For a long time there was no reply .
Then , a long way off , a dim light appeared and began to come nearer .
With it came a voice .
" Owls ahoy ! " it said .
" What is it ?
Is the King dead ?
Has an enemy landed in Narnia ?
Is it a flood ?
Or dragons ? "
When the light reached them , it turned out to be that of a large lantern .
She could see very little of the person who held it .
He seemed to be all legs and arms .
The owls were talking to him , explaining everything , but she was too tired to listen .
She tried to wake herself up a bit when she realised that they were saying good - bye to her .
But she could never afterwards remember much except that , sooner or later , she and Scrubb were stooping to enter a low doorway and then ( oh , thank heavens ) were lying down on something soft and warm , and a voice was saying ,
" There you are .
Best we can do .
You 'll lie cold and hard .
Damp too , I should n't wonder .
Wo n't sleep a wink , most likely ; even if there is n't a thunderstorm or a flood or the wigwam does n't fall down on top of us all , as I 've known them do .
Must make the best of it ---- " But she was fast asleep before the voice had ended .
When the children woke late next morning they found that they were lying , very dry and warm , on beds of straw in a dark place .
A triangular opening let in the daylight .
" Where on earth are we ? " asked Jill .
" In the wigwam of a Marsh - wiggle , " said Eustace .
" A what ? "
" A Marsh - wiggle .
Do n't ask me what it is .
I could n't see it last night .
I 'm getting up .
Let 's go and look for it . "
" How beastly one feels after sleeping in one 's clothes , " said Jill , sitting up .
" I was just thinking how nice it was not to have to dress , " said Eustace .
" Or wash either , I suppose , " said Jill scornfully .
But Scrubb had already got up , yawned , shaken himself , and crawled out of the wigwam .
Jill did the same .
What they found outside was quite unlike the bit of Narnia they had seen on the day before .
They were on a great flat plain which was cut into countless little islands by countless channels of water .
The islands were covered with coarse grass and bordered with reeds and rushes .
Sometimes there were beds of rushes about an acre in extent .
Clouds of birds were constantly alighting in them and rising from them again -- duck , snipe , bitterns , herons .
Many wigwams like that in which they had passed the night could be seen dotted about , but all at a good distance from one another ; for Marsh - wiggles are people who like privacy .
Except for the fringe of the forest several miles to the south and west of them , there was not a tree in sight .
Eastward the flat marsh stretched to low sand - hills on the horizon , and you could tell by the salt tang in the wind which blew from that direction that the sea lay over there .
To the North there were low pale - coloured hills , in places bastioned with rock .
The rest was all flat marsh .
It would have been a depressing place on a wet evening .
Seen under a morning sun , with a fresh wind blowing , and the air filled with the crying of birds , there was something fine and fresh and clean about its loneliness .
The children felt their spirits rise .
" Where has the thingummy got to , I wonder ? " said Jill .
" The Marsh - wiggle , " said Scrubb , as if he were rather proud of knowing the word .
" I expect -- hullo , that must be him . "
And then they both saw him , sitting with his back to them , fishing , about fifty yards away .
He had been hard to see at first because he was nearly the same colour as the marsh and because he sat so still .
" I suppose we 'd better go and speak to him , " said Jill .
Scrubb nodded .
They both felt a little nervous .
As they drew nearer , the figure turned its head and showed them a long thin face with rather sunken cheeks , a tightly shut mouth , a sharp nose , and no beard .
He was wearing a high , pointed hat like a steeple , with an enormously wide flat brim .
The hair , if it could be called hair which hung over his large ears was greeny - grey , and each lock was flat rather than round , so that they were like tiny reeds .
His expression was solemn , his complexion muddy , and you could see at once that he took a serious view of life .
" Good morning , Guests , " he said .
" Though when I say _good_ I do n't mean it wo n't probably turn to rain or it might be snow , or fog , or thunder .
You did n't get any sleep , I dare say . "
" Yes we did , though , " said Jill .
" We had a lovely night . "
" Ah , " said the Marsh - wiggle , shaking his head .
" I see you 're making the best of a bad job .
That 's right .
You 've been well brought up , you have .
You 've learned to put a good face on things . "
" Please , we do n't know your name , " said Scrubb .
" Puddleglum 's my name .
But it does n't matter if you forget it .
I can always tell you again . "
The children sat down on each side of him .
They now saw that he had very long legs and arms , so that although his body was not much bigger than a dwarf 's , he would be taller than most men when he stood up .
The fingers of his hands were webbed like a frog 's , and so were his bare feet which dangled in the muddy water .
He was dressed in earth - coloured clothes that hung loose about him .
" I 'm trying to catch a few eels to make an eel stew for our dinner , " said Puddleglum .
" Though I should n't wonder if I did n't get any .
And you wo n't like them much if I do . "
" Why not ? " asked Scrubb .
" Why , it 's not in reason that you should like our sort of victuals , though I 've no doubt you 'll put a bold face on it .
All the same , while I am a catching of them , if you two could try to light the fire -- no harm trying ---- !
The wood 's behind the wigwam .
It may be wet .
You could light it inside the wigwam , and then we 'd get all the smoke in our eyes .
Or you could light it outside , and then the rain would come and put it out .
Here 's my tinder - box .
You wo n't know how to use it , I expect . "
But Scrubb had learned that sort of thing on his last adventure .
The children ran back together to the wigwam , found the wood ( which was perfectly dry ) and succeeded in lighting a fire with rather less than the usual difficulty .
Then Scrubb sat and took care of it while Jill went and had some sort of wash -- not a very nice one -- in the nearest channel .
After that she saw to the fire and he had a wash .
Both felt a good deal fresher , but very hungry .
Presently the Marsh - wiggle joined them .
In spite of his expectation of catching no eels , he had a dozen or so , which he had already skinned and cleaned .
He put a big pot on , mended the fire , and lit his pipe .
Marsh - wiggles smoke a very strange , heavy sort of tobacco ( some people say they mix it with mud ) and the children noticed the smoke from Puddleglum 's pipe hardly rose in the air at all .
It trickled out of the bowl and downwards and drifted along the ground like a mist .
It was very black and set Scrubb coughing .
" Now , " said Puddleglum .
" Those eels will take a mortal long time to cook , and either of you might faint with hunger before they 're done .
I knew a little girl -- but I 'd better not tell you that story .
It might lower your spirits , and that 's a thing I never do .
So , to keep your minds off your hunger , we may as well talk about our plans . "
" Yes , do let 's , " said Jill .
" Can you help us to find Prince Rilian ? "
The Marsh - wiggle sucked in his cheeks till they were hollower than you would have thought possible .
" Well , I do n't know that you 'd call it _help_ , " he said .
" I do n't know that anyone can exactly _help_ .
It stands to reason we 're not likely to get very far on a journey to the North , not at this time of the year , with the winter coming on soon and all .
And an early winter too , by the look of things .
But you must n't let that make you down - hearted .
Very likely , what with enemies , and mountains , and rivers to cross , and losing our way , and next to nothing to eat , and sore feet , we 'll hardly notice the weather .
And if we do n't get far enough to do any good , we may get far enough not to get back in a hurry . "
Both children noticed that he said " we " , not " you " , and both exclaimed at the same moment .
" Are you coming with us ? "
" Oh yes , I 'm coming of course .
Might as well , you see .
I do n't suppose we shall ever see the King back in Narnia , now that he 's once set off for foreign parts ; and he had a nasty cough when he left .
Then there 's Trumpkin .
He 's failing fast .
And you 'll find there 'll have been a bad harvest after this terrible dry summer .
And I should n't wonder if some enemy attacked us .
Mark my words . "
" And how shall we start ?
' said Scrubb .
" Well , " said the Marsh - wiggle very slowly , " all the others who ever went looking for Prince Rilian started from that same fountain where the Lord Drinian saw the lady .
They went north , mostly .
And as none of them ever came back , we ca n't exactly say how they got on . "
" We 've got to start by finding a ruined city of giants , " said Jill .
" Aslan said so . "
" Got to start by _finding_ it , have we ? " answered Puddleglum .
" Not allowed to start by _looking_ for it , I suppose ? "
" That 's what I meant , of course , " said Jill .
" And then , when we 've found it ---- "
" Yes , when ! " said Puddleglum very drily .
" Does n't anyone know where it is ? " asked Scrubb .
" I do n't know about Anyone , " said Puddleglum .
" And I wo n't say I have n't heard of that Ruined City .
You would n't start from the fountain , though .
You 'd have to go across Ettinsmoor .
That 's where the Ruined City is , if it 's anywhere .
But I 've been as far in that direction as most people and I never got to any ruins , so I wo n't deceive you . "
" Where 's Ettinsmoor ? " said Scrubb .
" Look over there northward , " said Puddleglum , pointing with his pipe .
" See those hills and bits of cliff ?
That 's the beginning of Ettinsmoor .
But there 's a river between it and us ; the river Shribble .
No bridges , of course .
" I suppose we can ford it , though , " said Scrubb .
" Well , it has been forded , " admitted the Marsh - wiggle .
" Perhaps we shall meet people on Ettinsmoor who can tell us the way , " said Jill .
" You 're right about meeting people , " said Puddleglum .
" What sort of people live there ? " she asked .
" It 's not for me to say they are n't all right in their own way , " answered Puddleglum .
" If you like their way . "
" Yes , but what _are_ they ? " pressed Jill .
" There are so many queer creatures in this country .
I mean , are they animals , or birds , or dwarfs , or what ? "
The Marsh - wiggle gave a long whistle .
" Phew ! " he said .
" Do n't you know ?
I thought the owls had told you .
They 're giants . "
Jill winced .
She had never liked giants even in books , and she had once met one in a nightmare .
Then she saw Scrubb 's face , which had turned rather green , and thought to herself , " I bet he 's in a worse funk than I am . "
That made her feel braver .
" The King told me long ago , " said Scrubb -- " that time when I was with him at sea -- that he 'd jolly well beaten those giants in war and made them pay him tribute . "
" That 's true enough , " said Puddleglum .
" They 're at peace with us all right .
As long as we stay on our own side of the Shribble , they wo n't do us any harm .
Over on their side , on the Moor ---- Still , there 's always a chance .
If we do n't get near any of them , and if none of them forget themselves , and if we 're not seen , it 's just possible we might get a long way . "
" Look here ! " said Scrubb , suddenly losing his temper , as people so easily do when they have been frightened .
" I do n't believe the whole thing can be half as bad as you 're making out ; any more than the beds in the wigwam were hard or the wood was wet .
I do n't think Aslan would ever have sent us if there was so little chance as all that . "
He quite expected the Marsh - wiggle to give him an angry reply , but he only said , " That 's the spirit , Scrubb .
That 's the way to talk .
Put a good face on it .
But we all need to be very careful about our tempers , seeing all the hard times we shall have to go through together .
Wo n't do to quarrel , you know .
At any rate , do n't begin it too soon .
I know these expeditions usually _end_ that way : knifing one another , I should n't wonder , before all 's done .
But the longer we can keep off it ---- "
" Well , if you feel it 's so hopeless , " interrupted Scrubb , " I think you 'd better stay behind .
Pole and I can go on alone , ca n't we , Pole ? "
" Shut up and do n't be an ass , Scrubb , " said Jill hastily , terrified lest the Marsh - wiggle should take him at his word .
" Do n't you lose heart , Pole , " said Puddleglum .
" I 'm coming , sure and certain .
I 'm not going to lose an opportunity like this .
It will do me good .
They all say -- I mean , the other wiggles all say -- that I 'm too flighty ; do n't take life seriously enough .
If they 've said it once , they 've said it a thousand times .
' Puddleglum , ' they 've said , ' you 're altogether too full of bobance and bounce and high spirits .
You 've got to learn that life is n't all fricasseed frogs and eel pie .
You want something to sober you down a bit .
We 're only saying it for your own good , Puddleglum .
' That 's what they say .
Now a job like this -- a journey up north just as winter 's beginning , looking for a Prince that probably is n't there , by way of a ruined city that no one has ever seen -- will be just the thing .
If that does n't steady a chap , I do n't know what will . "
And he rubbed his big frog - like hands together as if he were talking of going to a party or a pantomime .
" And now , " he added , " let 's see how those eels are getting on . "
When the meal came it was delicious and the children had two large helpings each .
At first the Marsh - wiggle would n't believe that they really liked it , and when they had eaten so much that he had to believe them , he fell back on saying that it would probably disagree with them horribly .
" What 's food for wiggles may be poison for humans , I should n't wonder , " he said .
After the meal they had tea , in tins ( as you 've seen men having it who are working on the road ) , and Puddleglum had a good many sips out of a square black bottle .
He offered the children some of it , but they thought it very nasty .
The rest of the day was spent in preparations for an early start to - morrow morning .
Puddleglum , being far the biggest , said he would carry three blankets , with a large bit of bacon rolled up inside them .
Jill was to carry the remains of the eels , some biscuit , and the tinder - box .
Scrubb was to carry both his own cloak and Jill 's when they did n't want to wear them .
Scrubb ( who had learned some shooting when he sailed to the East under Caspian ) had Puddleglum 's second - best bow , and Puddleglum had his best one ; though he said that what with winds , and damp bowstrings , and bad light , and cold fingers , it was a hundred to one against either of them hitting anything .
He and Scrubb both had swords -- Scrubb had brought the one which had been left out for him in his room at Cair Paravel , but Jill had to be content with her knife .
There would have been a quarrel about this , but as soon as they started sparring the wiggle rubbed his hands and said , " Ah , there you are .
I thought as much .
That 's what usually happens on adventures . "
This made them both shut up .
All three went to bed early in the wigwam .
This time the children really had a rather bad night .
That was because Puddleglum , after saying , " You 'd better try for some sleep , you two ; not that I suppose any of us will close an eye to - night , " instantly went off into such a loud , continuous snore that , when Jill at last got to sleep , she dreamed all night about road - drills and waterfalls and being in express trains in tunnels .