The others admitted afterwards that Jill had been wonderful that day .
As soon as the King and the rest of the hunting party had set off , she began making a tour of the whole castle and asking questions , but all in such an innocent , babyish way that no one could suspect her of any secret design .
Though her tongue was never still , you could hardly say she talked : she prattled and giggled .
She made love to everyone -- the grooms , the porters , the housemaids , the ladies - in-waiting , and the elderly giant lords whose hunting days were past .
She submitted to being kissed and pawed about by any number of giantesses , many of whom seemed sorry for her and called her " a poor little thing " though none of them explained why .
She made especial friends with the cook and discovered the all - important fact there was a scullery door which let you out through the outer wall , so that you did not have to cross the courtyard or pass the great gatehouse .
In the kitchen she pretended to be greedy , and ate all sorts of scraps which the cook and scullions delighted to give her .
But upstairs among the ladies she asked questions about how she would be dressed for the great feast , and how long she would be allowed to sit up , and whether she would dance with some very , very small giant .
And then ( it made her hot all over when she remembered it afterwards ) she would put her head on one side in an idiotic fashion which grown - ups , giant and otherwise , thought very fetching , and shake her curls , and fidget , and say , " Oh , I do wish it was to - morrow night , do n't you ?
Do you think the time will go quickly till then ? "
And all the giantesses said she was a perfect little darling ; and some of them dabbed their eyes with enormous handkerchiefs as if they were going to cry .
" They 're dear little things at that age , " said one giantess to another .
" It seems almost a pity ... "
Scrubb and Puddleglum both did their best , but girls do that kind of thing better than boys .
Even boys do it better than marsh - wiggles .
At lunchtime something happened which made all three of them more anxious than ever to leave the castle of the Gentle Giants .
They had lunch in the great hall at a little table of their own , near the fireplace .
At a bigger table , about twenty yards away , half a dozen old giants were lunching .
Their conversation was so noisy , and so high up in the air , that the children soon took no more notice of it than you would of hooters outside the window or traffic noises in the street .
They were eating cold venison , a kind of food which Jill had never tasted before , and she was liking it .
Suddenly Puddleglum turned to them , and his face had gone so pale that you could see the paleness under the natural muddiness of his complexion .
He said :
" Do n't eat another bite . "
" What 's wrong ? " asked the other two in a whisper .
" Did n't you hear what those giants were saying ?
' That 's a nice tender haunch of venison , ' said one of them .
' Then that stag was a liar , ' said another .
' Why ?
' said the first one .
' Oh , ' said the other .
' They say that when he was caught he said , Do n't kill me , I 'm tough .
You wo n't like me .
' "
For a moment Jill did not realise the full meaning of this .
But she did when Scrubb 's eyes opened wide with horror and he said :
" So we 've been eating a _Talking_ stag . "
This discovery did n't have exactly the same effect on all of them .
Jill , who was new to that world , was sorry for the poor stag and thought it rotten of the giants to have killed him .
Scrubb , who had been in that world before and had at least one Talking beast as his dear friend , felt horrified ; as you might feel about a murder .
But Puddleglum , who was Narnian born , was sick and faint , and felt as you would feel if you found you had eaten a baby .
" We 've brought the anger of Aslan on us , " he said .
" That 's what comes of not attending to the signs .
We 're under a curse , I expect .
If it was allowed , it would be the best thing we could do , to take these knives and drive them into our own hearts . "
And gradually even Jill came to see it from his point of view .
At any rate , none of them wanted any more lunch .
And as soon as they thought it safe they crept quietly out of the hall .
It was now drawing near to that time of the day on which their hopes of escape depended , and all became nervous .
They hung about in passages and waited for things to become quiet .
The giants in the hall sat on a dreadfully long time after the meal was over .
The bald one was telling a story .
When that was over , the three travellers dawdled down to the kitchen .
But there were still plenty of giants there , or at least in the scullery , washing up and putting things away .
It was agonising , waiting till these finished their jobs and , one by one , wiped their hands and went away .
At last only one old giantess was left in the room .
She pottered about , and pottered about , and at last the three travellers realised with horror that she did not intend to go away at all .
" Well , dearies , " she said to them .
" That job 's about through .
Let 's put the kettle there .
That 'll make a nice cup of tea presently .
Now I can have a little bit of a rest .
Just look into the scullery , like good poppets , and tell me if the back door is open . "
" Yes , it is , " said Scrubb .
" That 's right .
I always leave it open so as Puss can get in and out , the poor thing . "
Then she sat down on one chair and put her feet up on another .
" I do n't know as I might n't have forty winks , " said the giantess .
" If only that blarney hunting party does n't come back too soon . "
All their spirits leaped up when she mentioned forty winks , and flopped down again when she mentioned the return of the hunting party .
" When do they usually come back ? " asked Jill .
" You never can tell , " said the giantess .
" But there ; go and be quiet for a bit , my dearies . "
They retreated to the far end of the kitchen , and would have slipped out into the scullery there and then if the giantess had not sat up , opened her eyes , and brushed away a fly .
" Do n't try it till we 're sure she 's really asleep , " whispered Scrubb .
" Or it 'll spoil everything . "
So they all huddled at the kitchen end , waiting and watching .
The thought that the hunters might come back at any moment was terrible .
And the giantess was fidgety .
Whenever they thought she had really gone to sleep , she moved .
" I ca n't bear this , " thought Jill .
To distract her mind , she began looking about her .
Just in front of her was a clean wide table with two clean pie - dishes on it , and an open book .
They were giant pie - dishes of course .
Jill thought that she could lie down just comfortably in one of them .
Then she climbed up on the bench beside the table to look at the book .
She read :
MALLARD .
This delicious bird can be cooked in a variety of ways .
" It 's a cookery book , " thought Jill without much interest , and glanced over her shoulder .
The giantess 's eyes were shut but she did n't look as if she were properly asleep .
Jill glanced back at the book .
It was arranged alphabetically : and at the very next entry her heart seemed to stop beating .
It ran --
MAN .
This elegant little biped has long been valued as a delicacy .
It forms a traditional part of the Autumn Feast , and is served between the fish and the joint .
Each Man --
but she could not bear to read any more .
She turned round .
The giantess had waked up and was having a fit of coughing .
Jill nudged the other two and pointed to the book .
They also mounted the bench and bent over the huge pages .
Scrubb was still reading about how to cook Men when Puddleglum pointed to the next entry below it .
It was like this :
MARSH - WIGGLE .
Some authorities reject this animal altogether as unfit for giants ' consumption because of its stringy consistency and muddy flavour .
The flavour can , however , be greatly reduced if ----
Jill touched his feet , and Scrubb 's , gently .
All three looked back at the giantess .
Her mouth was slightly open and from her nose there came a sound which at that moment was more welcome to them than any music ; she snored .
And now it was a question of tip - toe work , not daring to go too fast , hardly daring to breathe , out through the scullery ( giant sculleries smell horrid ) , out at last into the pale sunlight of a winter afternoon .
They were at the top of a rough little path which ran steeply down .
And , thank heavens , on the right side of the castle ; the City Ruinous was in sight .
In a few minutes they were back on the broad , steep road which led down from the main gate of the castle .
They were also in full view from every single window on that side .
If it had been one , or two , or five windows there 'd be a reasonable chance that no - one might be looking out .
But there were nearer fifty than five .
They now realised , too , that the road on which they were , and indeed all the ground between them and the City Ruinous , did n't offer as much cover as would hide a fox ; it was all coarse grass and pebbles and flat stones .
To make matters worse , they were now in the clothes that the giants had provided for them last night : except Puddleglum , whom nothing would fit .
Jill wore a vivid green robe , rather too long for her , and over that a scarlet mantle fringed with white fur. Scrubb had scarlet stockings , blue tunic and cloak , a gold - hilted sword , and a feathered bonnet .
" Nice bits of colour , you two are , " muttered Puddleglum .
" Show up very prettily on a winter day .
The worst archer in the world could n't miss either of you if you were in range .
And talking of archers , we 'll be sorry not to have our own bows before long , I should n't wonder .
Bit thin , too , those clothes of yours , are they ? "
" Yes , I 'm freezing already , " said Jill .
A few minutes ago when they had been in the kitchen , she had thought that if only they could once get out of the castle , their escape would be almost complete .
She now realised that the most dangerous part of it was still to come .
" Steady , steady , " said Puddleglum .
" Do n't look back .
Do n't walk too quickly .
Whatever you do , do n't run .
Look as if we were just taking a stroll , and then , if anyone sees us , he might , just possibly , not bother .
The moment we look like people running away , we 're done . "
The distance to the City Ruinous seemed longer than Jill would have believed possible .
But bit by bit they were covering it .
Then came a noise .
The other two gasped .
Jill , who did n't know what it was , said , " What 's that ? "
" Hunting horn , " whispered Scrubb .
" But do n't run even now , " said Puddleglum .
" Not till I give the word . "
This time Jill could n't help glancing over her shoulder .
There , about half a mile away , was the hunt returning from behind them on the left .
They walked on .
Suddenly a great clamour of giant voices arose : then shouts and hollas .
" They 've seen us .
Run , " said Puddleglum .
Jill gathered up her long skirts -- horrible things for running in -- and ran .
There was no mistaking the danger now .
She could hear the music of the hounds .
She could hear the King 's voice roaring out , " After them , after them , or we 'll have no man - pies to - morrow . "
She was last of the three now , cumbered with her dress , slipping on loose stones , her hair getting in her mouth , running - pains across her chest .
The hounds were much nearer .
Now she had to run uphill , up the stony slope which led to the lowest step of the giant stairway .
She had no idea what they would do when they got there , or how they would be any better off even if they reached the top .
But she did n't think about that .
She was like a hunted animal now ; as long as the pack was after her , she must run till she dropped .
The Marsh - wiggle was ahead .
As he came to the lowest step he stopped , looked a little to his right , and all of a sudden darted into a little hole or crevice at the bottom of it .
His long legs , disappearing into it , looked very like those of a spider .
Scrubb hesitated and then vanished after him .
Jill , breathless and reeling , came to the place about a minute later .
It was an unattractive hole -- a crack between the earth and the stone about three feet long and hardly more than a foot high .
You had to fling yourself flat on your face and crawl in .
You could n't do it so very quickly either .
She felt sure that a dog 's teeth would close on her heel before she had got inside .
" Quick , quick .
Stones .
Fill up the opening , " came Puddleglum 's voice in the darkness beside her .
It was pitch black in there , except for the grey light in the opening by which they had crawled in .
The other two were working hard .
She could see Scrubb 's small hands and the Marsh - wiggle 's big , frog - like hands black against the light , working desperately to pile up stones .
Then she realised how important this was and began groping for large stones herself , and handing them to the others .
Before the dogs were baying and yelping at the cave mouth , they had it pretty well filled ; and now , of course , there was no light at all .
" Further in , quick , " said Puddleglum 's voice .
" Let 's all hold hands , " said Jill .
" Good idea , " said Scrubb .
But it took them quite a long time to find one another 's hands in the darkness .
The dogs were sniffing at the other side of the barrier now .
" Try if we can stand up , " suggested Scrubb .
They did and found that they could .
Then , Puddleglum holding out a hand behind him to Scrubb , and Scrubb holding a hand out behind him to Jill ( who wished very much that she was the middle one of the party and not the last ) , they began groping with their feet and stumbling forwards into the blackness .
It was all loose stones underfoot .
Then Puddleglum came up to a wall of rock .
They turned a little to their right and went on .
There were a good many more twists and turns .
Jill had now no sense of direction at all , and no idea where the mouth of the cave lay .
" The question is , " came Puddleglum 's voice out of the darkness ahead , " whether , taking one thing with another , it would n't be better to go back ( if we _can_ ) and give the giants a treat at that feast of theirs , instead of losing our way in the guts of a hill where , ten to one , there 's dragons and deep holes and gases and water and ---- Ow !
Let go !
Save yourselves .
I 'm ---- "
After that all happened quickly .
There was a wild cry , a swishing , dusty , gravelly noise , a rattle of stones , and Jill found herself sliding , sliding , hopelessly sliding , and sliding quicker every moment down a slope that grew steeper every moment .
It was not a smooth , firm slope , but a slope of small stones and rubbish .
Even if you could have stood up , it would have been no use .
Any bit of that slope you had put your foot on would have slid away from under you and carried you down with it .
But Jill was more lying than standing .
And the further they all slid , the more they disturbed all the stones and earth , so that the general downward rush of everything ( including themselves ) got faster and louder and dustier and dirtier .
From the sharp cries and swearing of the other two , Jill got the idea that many of the stones which she was dislodging were hitting Scrubb and Puddleglum pretty hard .
And now she was going at a furious rate and felt sure she would be broken to bits at the bottom .
Yet somehow they were n't .
They were a mass of bruises , and the wet sticky stuff on her face appeared to be blood .
And such a mass of loose earth , shingle , and larger stones was piled up round her ( and partly over her ) that she could n't get up .
The darkness was so complete that it made no difference at all whether you had your eyes open or shut .
There was no noise .
And that was the very worst moment Jill had ever known in her life .
Supposing she was alone : supposing the others ...
Then she heard movements around her .
And presently all three , in shaken voices , were explaining that none of them seemed to have any broken bones .
" We can never get up that again , " said Scrubb 's voice .
" And have you noticed how warm it is ? " said the voice of Puddleglum .
" That means we 're a long way down .
Might be nearly a mile . "
No - one said anything .
Some time later Puddleglum added :
" My tinder - box has gone . "
After another long pause Jill said , " I 'm terribly thirsty . "
No one suggested doing anything .
There was so obviously nothing to be done .
For the moment , they did not feel it quite so badly as one might have expected ; that was because they were so tired .
Long , long afterwards , without the slightest warning , an utterly strange voice spoke .
They knew at once that it was not the one voice in the whole world for which each had secretly been hoping ; the voice of Aslan .
It was a dark , flat voice -- almost , if you know what that means , a pitch - black voice .
It said :
" What make you here , creatures of the Overworld ? "