After they had ridden for several hours down the valley , it widened out and they could see what was ahead of them .
The river which they had been following here joined a broader river , wide and turbulent , which flowed from their left to their right , towards the east .
Beyond this new river a delightful country rose gently in low hills , ridge beyond ridge , to the Northern Mountains themselves .
To the right there were rocky pinnacles , one or two of them with snow clinging to the ledges .
To the left , pine - clad slopes , frowning cliffs , narrow gorges , and blue peaks stretched away as far as the eye could reach .
He could no longer make out Mount Pire .
Straight ahead the mountain range sank to a wooded saddle which of course must be the pass from Archenland into Narnia .
" Broo - hoo - hoo , the North , the green North ! " neighed Bree : and certainly the lower hills looked greener and fresher than anything that Aravis and Shasta , with their southern - bred eyes , had ever imagined .
Spirits rose as they clattered down to the water 's - meet of the two rivers .
The eastern - flowing river , which was pouring from the higher mountains at the western end of the range , was far too swift and too broken with rapids for them to think of swimming it ; but after some casting about , up and down the bank , they found a place shallow enough to wade .
The roar and clatter of water , the great swirl against the horses ' fetlocks , the cool , stirring air and the darting dragon - flies , filled Shasta with a strange excitement .
" Friends , we are in Archenland ! " said Bree proudly as he splashed and churned his way out on the northern bank .
" I think that river we 've just crossed is called the Winding Arrow . "
" I hope we 're in time , " murmured Hwin .
Then they began going up , slowly and zigzagging a good deal , for the hills were steep .
It was all open park - like country with no roads or houses in sight .
Scattered trees , never thick enough to be a forest , were everywhere .
Shasta , who had lived all his life in an almost tree-less grassland , had never seen so many or so many kinds .
If you had been there you would probably have known ( he did n't ) that he was seeing oaks , beeches , silver birches , rowans and sweet chestnuts .
Rabbits scurried away in every direction as they advanced , and presently they saw a whole herd of fallow deer making off among the trees .
" Is n't it simply glorious ! " said Aravis .
At the first ridge Shasta turned in the saddle and looked back .
There was no sign of Tashbaan ; the desert , unbroken except by the narrow green crack which they had travelled down , spread to the horizon .
" Hullo ! " he said suddenly .
" What 's that ? "
" What 's what ? " said Bree , turning round .
Hwin and Aravis did the same .
" That , " said Shasta , pointing .
" It looks like smoke .
Is it a fire ? "
" Sand - storm , I should say , " said Bree .
" Not much wind to raise it , " said Aravis .
" Oh ! " exclaimed Hwin .
" Look !
There are things flashing in it .
Look !
They 're helmets -- and armour .
And it 's moving : moving this way . "
" By Tash ! " said Aravis .
" It 's the army .
It 's Rabadash . "
" Of course it is , " said Hwin .
" Just what I was afraid of .
Quick !
We must get to Anvard before it . "
And without another word she whisked round and began galloping north .
Bree tossed his head and did the same .
" Come on , Bree , come on , " yelled Aravis over her shoulder .
This race was very gruelling for the Horses .
As they topped each ridge they found another valley and another ridge beyond it ; and though they knew they were going in more or less the right direction , no one knew how far it was to Anvard .
From the top of the second ridge Shasta looked back again .
Instead of a dust - cloud well out in the desert he now saw a black , moving mass , rather like ants , on the far bank of the Winding Arrow .
They were doubtless looking for a ford .
" They 're on the river ! " he yelled wildly .
" Quick !
Quick ! " shouted Aravis .
" We might as well not have come at all if we do n't reach Anvard in time .
Gallop , Bree , gallop .
Remember you 're a war - horse . "
It was all Shasta could do to prevent himself from shouting out similar instructions ; but he thought , " The poor chap 's doing all he can already , " and held his tongue .
And certainly both Horses were doing , if not all they could , all they thought they could ; which is not quite the same thing .
Bree had caught up with Hwin and they thundered side by side over the turf .
It did n't look as if Hwin could possibly keep it up much longer .
At that moment everyone 's feelings were completely altered by a sound from behind .
It was not the sound they had been expecting to hear -- the noise of hoofs and jingling armour , mixed , perhaps , with Calormene battle - cries .
Yet Shasta knew it at once .
It was the same snarling roar he had heard that moonlit night when they first met Aravis and Hwin .
Bree knew it too .
His eyes gleamed red and his ears lay flat back on his skull .
And Bree now discovered that he had not really been going as fast -- not quite as fast -- as he could .
Shasta felt the change at once .
Now they were really going all out .
In a few seconds they were well ahead of Hwin .
" It 's not fair , " thought Shasta .
" I _did_ think we 'd be safe from lions here ! "
He looked over his shoulder .
Everything was only too clear .
A huge tawny creature , its body low to the ground , like a cat streaking across the lawn to a tree when a strange dog has got into the garden , was behind them .
And it was nearer every second and half second .
He looked forward again and saw something which he did not take in , or even think about .
Their way was barred by a smooth green wall about ten feet high .
In the middle of that wall there was a gate , open .
In the middle of the gateway stood a tall man dressed , down to his bare feet , in a robe coloured like autumn leaves , leaning on a straight staff .
His beard fell almost to his knees .
Shasta saw all this in a glance and looked back again .
The lion had almost got Hwin now .
It was making snaps at her hind legs , and there was no hope now in her foam - flecked , wide - eyed face .
" Stop , " bellowed Shasta in Bree 's ear .
" Must go back .
Must help ! "
Bree always said afterwards that he never heard , or never understood this ; and as he was in general a very truthful horse we must accept his word .
Shasta slipped his feet out of the stirrups , slid both his legs over on the left side , hesitated for one hideous hundredth of a second , and jumped .
It hurt horribly and nearly winded him ; but before he knew how it hurt him he was staggering back to help Aravis .
He had never done anything like this in his life before and hardly knew why he was doing it now .
One of the most terrible noises in the world , a horse 's scream , broke from Hwin 's lips .
Aravis was stooping low over Hwin 's neck and seemed to be trying to draw her sword .
And now all three -- Aravis , Hwin , and the lion -- were almost on top of Shasta .
Before they reached him the lion rose on its hind legs , larger than you would have believed a lion could be , and jabbed at Aravis with its right paw .
Shasta could see all the terrible claws extended .
Aravis screamed and reeled in the saddle .
The lion was tearing her shoulders .
Shasta , half mad with horror , managed to lurch towards the brute .
He had no weapon , not even a stick or a stone .
He shouted out , idiotically , at the lion as one would at a dog .
" Go home !
Go home ! "
For a fraction of a second he was staring right into its wide - opened , raging mouth .
Then , to his utter astonishment , the lion , still on its hind legs , checked itself suddenly , turned head over heels , picked itself up , and rushed away .
Shasta did not for a moment suppose it had gone for good .
He turned and raced for the gate in the green wall which , now for the first time , he remembered seeing .
Hwin , stumbling and nearly fainting , was just entering the gate : Aravis still kept her seat but her back was covered with blood .
" Come in , my daughter , come in , " the robed and bearded man was saying , and then " Come in , my son " as Shasta panted up to him .
He heard the gate closed behind him ; and the bearded stranger was already helping Aravis off her horse .
They were in a wide and perfectly circular enclosure , protected by a high wall of green turf .
A pool of perfectly still water , so full that the water was almost exactly level with the ground , lay before him .
At one end of the pool , completely overshadowing it with its branches , there grew the hugest and most beautiful tree that Shasta had ever seen .
Beyond the pool was a little low house of stone roofed with deep and ancient thatch .
There was a sound of bleating and over at the far side of the enclosure there were some goats .
The level ground was completely covered with the finest grass .
" Are -- are -- are you , " panted Shasta .
" Are you King Lune of Archenland ? "
The old man shook his head .
" No , " he replied in a quiet voice , " I am the Hermit of the Southern March .
And now , my son , waste no time on questions , but obey .
This damsel is wounded .
Your horses are spent .
Rabadash is at this moment finding a ford over the Winding Arrow .
If you run now , without a moment 's rest , you will still be in time to warn King Lune . "
Shasta 's heart fainted at these words for he felt he had no strength left .
And he writhed inside at what seemed the cruelty and unfairness of the demand .
He had not yet learned that if you do one good deed your reward usually is to be set to do another and harder and better one .
But all he said out loud was :
" Where is the King ? "
The Hermit turned and pointed with his staff .
" Look , " he said .
" There is another gate , right opposite to the one you entered by .
Open it and go straight ahead : always straight ahead , over level or steep , over smooth or rough , over dry or wet .
I know by my art that you will find King Lune straight ahead .
But run , run : always run . "
Shasta nodded his head , ran to the northern gate and disappeared beyond it .
Then the Hermit took Aravis , whom he had all this time been supporting with his left arm , and half led , half carried her into the house .
After a long time he came out again .
" Now , cousins , " he said to the Horses .
" It is your turn . "
Without waiting for an answer -- and indeed they were too exhausted to speak -- he took the bridles and saddles off both of them .
Then he rubbed them both down , so well that a groom in a king 's stable could not have done it better .
" There , cousins , " he said , " dismiss it all from your minds and be comforted .
Here is water and there is grass .
You shall have a hot mash when I have milked my other cousins , the goats . "
" Sir , " said Hwin , finding her voice at last , " will the Tarkheena live ?
Has the lion killed her ? "
" I who know many present things by my art , " replied the Hermit with a smile , " have yet little knowledge of things future .
Therefore I do not know whether any man or woman or beast in the whole world will be alive when the sun sets to - night .
But be of good hope .
The damsel is likely to live as long as any of her age . "
When Aravis came to herself she found that she was lying on her face on a low bed of extraordinary softness in a cool , bare room with walls of undressed stone .
She could n't understand why she had been laid on her face ; but when she tried to turn and felt the hot , burning pains all over her back , she remembered , and realised why .
She could n't understand what delightfully springy stuff the bed was made of , because it was made of heather ( which is the best bedding ) and heather was a thing she had never seen or heard of .
The door opened and the Hermit entered , carrying a large wooden bowl in his hand .
After carefully setting this down , he came to the bedside , and asked :
" How do you find yourself , my daughter ? "
" My back is very sore , father , " said Aravis , " but there is nothing else wrong with me . "
He knelt beside her , laid his hand on her forehead , and felt her pulse .
" There is no fever , " he said .
" You will do well .
Indeed there is no reason why you should not get up to - morrow .
But now , drink this . "
He fetched the wooden bowl and held it to her lips .
Aravis could n't help making a face when she tasted it , for goats ' milk is rather a shock when you are not used to it .
But she was very thirsty and managed to drink it all and felt better when she had finished .
" Now , daughter , you may sleep when you wish , " said the Hermit .
" For your wounds are washed and dressed and though they smart they are no more serious than if they had been the cuts of a whip .
It must have been a very strange lion ; for instead of catching you out of the saddle and getting his teeth into you , he has only drawn his claws across your back .
Ten scratches : sore , but not deep or dangerous . "
" I say ! " said Aravis .
" I _have_ had luck . "
" Daughter , " said the Hermit , " I have now lived a hundred and nine winters in this world and have never yet met any such thing as Luck .
There is something about all this that I do not understand : but if ever we need to know it , you may be sure that we shall . "
" And what about Rabadash and his two hundred horse ? " asked Aravis .
" They will not pass this way , I think , " said the Hermit .
" They must have found a ford by now well to the east of us .
From there they will try to ride straight to Anvard . "
" Poor Shasta ! " said Aravis .
" Has he far to go ?
Will he get there first ? "
" There is good hope of it , " said the old man .
Aravis lay down again ( on her side this time ) and said , " Have I been asleep for a long time ?
It seems to be getting dark . "
The Hermit was looking out of the only window , which faced north .
" This is not the darkness of night , " he said presently .
" The clouds are rolling down from Stormness Head .
Our foul weather always comes from there in these parts .
There will be thick fog to - night . "
Next day , except for her sore back , Aravis felt so well that after breakfast ( which was porridge and cream ) the Hermit said she could get up .
And of course she at once went out to speak to the Horses .
The weather had changed and the whole of that green enclosure was filled , like a great green cup , with sunlight .
It was a very peaceful place , lonely and quiet .
Hwin at once trotted across to Aravis and gave her a horse - kiss .
" But where 's Bree ? " said Aravis when each had asked after the other 's health and sleep .
" Over there , " said Hwin , pointing with her nose to the far side of the circle .
" And I wish you 'd come and talk to him .
There 's something wrong , I ca n't get a word out of him . "
They strolled across and found Bree lying with his face towards the wall , and though he must have heard them coming , he never turned his head or spoke a word .
" Good morning , Bree , " said Aravis .
" How are you this morning ? "
Bree muttered something that no one could hear .
" The Hermit says that Shasta probably got to King Lune in time , " continued Aravis , " so it looks as if all our troubles were over .
Narnia , at last , Bree ! "
" I shall never see Narnia , " said Bree in a low voice .
" Are n't you well , Bree dear ? " said Aravis .
Bree turned round at last , his face mournful as only a horse 's can be .
" I shall go back to Calormen , " he said .
" What ? " said Aravis .
" Back to slavery ! "
" Yes , " said Bree .
" Slavery is all I 'm fit for .
How can I ever show my face among the free Horses of Narnia ?
-- I who left a mare and a girl and a boy to be eaten by lions while I galloped all I could to save my own wretched skin ! "
" We all ran as hard as we could , " said Hwin .
" Shasta did n't ! " snorted Bree .
" At least he ran in the right direction : ran _back_ .
And that is what shames me most of all .
I , who called myself a war - horse and boasted of a hundred fights , to be beaten by a little human boy -- a child , a mere foal , who had never held a sword nor had any good nurture or example in his life ! "
" I know , " said Aravis .
" I felt just the same .
Shasta was marvellous .
I 'm just as bad as you , Bree .
I 've been snubbing him and looking down on him ever since you met us and now he turns out to be the best of us all .
But I think it would be better to stay and say we 're sorry than to go back to Calormen . "
" It 's all very well for you , " said Bree .
" You have n't disgraced yourself .
But I 've lost everything . "
" My good Horse , " said the Hermit , who had approached them unnoticed because his bare feet made so little noise on that sweet , dewy grass .
" My good Horse , you 've lost nothing but your self-conceit .
No , no , cousin .
Do n't put back your ears and shake your mane at me .
If you are really so humbled as you sounded a minute ago , you must learn to listen to sense .
You 're not quite the great horse you had come to think , from living among poor dumb horses .
Of course you were braver and cleverer than _them_ .
You could hardly help being that .
It does n't follow that you 'll be anyone very special in Narnia .
But as long as you know you 're nobody very special , you 'll be a very decent sort of Horse , on the whole , and taking one thing with another .
And now , if you and my other four - footed cousin will come round to the kitchen door we 'll see about the other half of that mash . "