This is a story about something that happened long ago when your grandfather was a child .
It is a very important story because it shows how all the comings and goings between our own world and the land of Narnia first began .
In those days Mr. Sherlock Holmes was still living in Baker Street and the Bastables were looking for treasure in the Lewisham Road .
In those days , if you were a boy you had to wear a stiff Eton collar every day , and schools were usually nastier than now .
But meals were nicer ; and as for sweets , I wo n't tell you how cheap and good they were , because it would only make your mouth water in vain .
And in those days there lived in London a girl called Polly Plummer .
She lived in one of a long row of houses which were all joined together .
One morning she was out in the back garden when a boy scrambled up from the garden next door and put his face over the wall .
Polly was very surprised because up till now there had never been any children in that house , but only Mr. Ketterley and Miss Ketterley , a brother and sister , old bachelor and old maid , living together .
So she looked up , full of curiosity .
The face of the strange boy was very grubby .
It could hardly have been grubbier if he had first rubbed his hands in the earth , and then had a good cry , and then dried his face with his hands .
As a matter of fact , this was very nearly what he had been doing .
" Hullo , " said Polly .
" Hullo , " said the boy .
" What 's your name ? "
" Polly , " said Polly .
" What 's yours ? "
" Digory , " said the boy .
" I say , what a funny name ! " said Polly .
" It is n't half so funny as Polly , " said Digory .
" Yes it is , " said Polly .
" No , it is n't , " said Digory .
" At any rate I _do_ wash my face , " said Polly .
" Which is what you need to do ; especially after ---- " and then she stopped .
She had been going to say " After you 've been blubbing , " but she thought that would n't be polite .
" All right , I have then , " said Digory in a much louder voice , like a boy who was so miserable that he did n't care who knew he had been crying .
" And so would you , " he went on , " if you 'd lived all your life in the country and had a pony , and a river at the bottom of the garden , and then been brought to live in a beastly Hole like this . "
" London is n't a Hole , " said Polly indignantly .
But the boy was too wound up to take any notice of her , and he went on --
" And if your father was away in India -- and you had to come and live with an Aunt and an Uncle who 's mad ( how would you like that ? )
-- and if the reason was that they were looking after your Mother -- and if your Mother was ill and was going to -- going to -- die . "
Then his face went the wrong sort of shape as it does if you 're trying to keep back your tears .
" I did n't know .
I 'm sorry , " said Polly humbly .
And then , because she hardly knew what to say , and also to turn Digory 's mind to cheerful subjects , she asked :
" Is Mr. Ketterley really mad ? "
" Well either he 's mad , " said Digory , " or there 's some other mystery .
He has a study on the top - floor and Aunt Letty says I must never go up there .
Well , that looks fishy to begin with .
And then there 's another thing .
Whenever he tries to say anything to me at meal times -- he never even tries to talk to _her_ -- she always shuts him up .
She says , ' Do n't worry the boy , Andrew ' or ' I 'm sure Digory does n't want to hear about _that_ ' or else ' Now , Digory , would n't you like to go out and play in the garden ' . "
" What sort of things does he try to say ? "
" I do n't know .
He never gets far enough .
But there 's more than that .
One night -- it was last night in fact -- as I was going past the foot of the attic - stairs on my way to bed ( and I do n't much care for going past them either ) I 'm sure I heard a yell . "
" Perhaps he keeps a mad wife shut up there . "
" Yes , I 've thought of that . "
" Or perhaps he 's a coiner . "
" Or he might have been a pirate , like the man at the beginning of _Treasure Island_ , and be always hiding from his old shipmates . "
" How exciting ! " said Polly , " I never knew your house was so interesting . "
" You may think it interesting , " said Digory .
" But you would n't like it if you had to sleep there .
How would you like to lie awake listening for Uncle Andrew 's step to come creeping along the passage to your room ?
And he has such awful eyes . "
That was how Polly and Digory got to know one another ; and as it was just the beginning of the summer holidays and neither of them was going away to the sea that year , they met nearly every day .
Their adventures began chiefly because it was one of the wettest and coldest summers there had been for years .
That drove them to do indoor things : you might say , indoor exploration .
It is wonderful how much exploring you can do with a stump of candle in a big house , or in a row of houses .
Polly had discovered long ago that if you opened a certain little door in the box - room attic of her house you would find the cistern and a dark place behind it which you could get into by a little careful climbing .
The dark place was like a long tunnel with brick wall on one side and sloping roof on the other .
In the roof there were little chinks of light between the slates .
There was no floor in this tunnel : you had to step from rafter to rafter , and between them there was only plaster .
If you stepped on this you would find yourself falling through the ceiling of the room below .
Polly had used the bit of the tunnel just beside the cistern as a smugglers ' cave .
She had brought up bits of old packing cases and the seats of broken kitchen chairs , and things of that sort , and spread them across from rafter to rafter so as to make a bit of floor .
Here she kept a cash - box containing various treasures , and a story she was writing , and usually a few apples .
She had often drunk a quiet bottle of ginger - beer in there : the old bottles made it look more like a smugglers ' cave .
Digory quite liked the Cave ( she would n't let him see the story ) but he was more interested in exploring .
" Look here , " he said .
" How long does this tunnel go on for ?
I mean , does it stop where your house ends ? "
" No , " said Polly .
" The walls do n't go out to the roof .
It goes on .
I do n't know how far . "
" Then we could get the length of the whole row of houses . "
" So we could , " said Polly .
" And oh , I say ! "
" What ? "
" We could get _into_ the other houses . "
" Yes , and get taken up for burglars !
No thanks . "
" Do n't be so jolly clever .
I was thinking of the house beyond yours . "
" What about it ? "
" Why , it 's the empty one .
Daddy says it 's always been empty ever since we came here . "
" I suppose we ought to have a look at it then , " said Digory .
He was a good deal more excited than you 'd have thought from the way he spoke .
For of course he was thinking , just as you would have been , of all the reasons why the house might have been empty so long .
So was Polly .
Neither of them said the word " haunted . "
And both felt that once the thing had been suggested , it would be feeble not to do it .
" Shall we go and try it now ? " said Digory .
" All right , " said Polly .
" Do n't if you 'd rather not , " said Digory .
" I 'm game if you are , " said she .
" How are we to know when we 're in the next house but one ? "
They decided they would have to go out into the box - room and walk across it taking steps as long as the steps from one rafter to the next .
That would give them an idea of how many rafters went to a room .
Then they would allow about four more for the passage between the two attics in Polly 's house , and then the same number for the maid 's bedroom as for the box - room .
That would give them the length of the house .
When they had done that distance twice they would be at the end of Digory 's house ; any door they came to after that would let them into an attic of the empty house .
" But I do n't expect it 's really empty at all , " said Digory .
" What do you expect ? "
" I expect someone lives there in secret , only coming in and out at night , with a dark lantern .
We shall probably discover a gang of desperate criminals and get a reward .
It 's all rot to say a house would be empty all those years unless there was some mystery . "
" Daddy thought it must be the drains , " said Polly .
" Pooh !
Grown - ups are always thinking of uninteresting explanations , " said Digory .
Now that they were talking by daylight in the attic instead of by candlelight in the Smugglers ' Cave it seemed much less likely that the empty house would be haunted .
When they had measured the attic they had to get a pencil and do a sum .
They both got different answers to it at first , and even when they agreed I am not sure they got it right .
They were in a hurry to start on the exploration .
" We must n't make a sound , " said Polly as they climbed in again behind the cistern .
Because it was such an important occasion they took a candle each ( Polly had a good store of these in her cave ) .
It was very dark and dusty and draughty and they stepped from rafter to rafter without a word except when they whispered to one another , " We 're opposite _your_ attic now " or " this must be halfway through _our_ house . "
And neither of them stumbled and the candles did n't go out , and at last they came where they could see a little door in the brick wall on their right .
There was no bolt or handle on this side of it , of course , for the door had been made for getting in , not for getting out ; but there was a catch ( as there often is on the inside of a cupboard door ) which they felt sure the would be able to turn .
" Shall I ? " said Digory .
" I 'm game if you are , " said Polly , just as she had said before .
Both felt that it was becoming very serious , but neither would draw back .
Digory pushed round the catch with some difficulty .
The door swung open and the sudden daylight made them blink .
Then , with a great shock , they saw that they were looking , not into a deserted attic , but into a furnished room .
But it seemed empty enough .
It was dead silent .
Polly 's curiosity got the better of her .
She blew out her candle and stepped out into the strange room , making no more noise than a mouse .
It was shaped , of course , like an attic , but furnished as a sitting - room .
Every bit of the walls was lined with shelves and every bit of the shelves was full of books .
A fire was burning in the grate ( you remember that it was a very cold wet summer that year ) and in front of the fireplace with its back towards them was a high - backed arm - chair .
Between the chair and Polly , and filling most of the middle of the room , was a big table piled with all sorts of things -- printed books , and books of the sort you write in , and ink bottles and pens and sealing - wax and a microscope .
But what she noticed first was a bright red wooden tray with a number of rings on it .
They were in pairs -- a yellow one and a green one together , then a little space , and then another yellow one and another green one .
They were no bigger than ordinary rings , and no one could help noticing them because they were so bright .
They were the most beautifully shiny little things you can imagine .
If Polly had been a very little younger she would have wanted to put one in her mouth .
The room was so quiet that you noticed the ticking of the clock at once .
And yet , as she now found , it was not absolutely quiet either .
There was a faint -- a very , very faint humming sound .
If Hoovers had been invented in those days Polly would have thought it was the sound of a Hoover being worked a long way off -- several rooms away and several floors below .
But it was a nicer sound than that , a more musical tone : only so faint that you could hardly hear it .
" It 's all right ; there 's no one here , " said Polly over her shoulder to Digory .
She was speaking above a whisper now .
And Digory came out , blinking and looking extremely dirty -- as indeed Polly was too .
" This is no good , " he said .
" It 's not an empty house at all .
We 'd better bunk before any one comes . "
" What do you think those are ? " said Polly , pointing at the coloured rings .
" Oh come _on_ , " said Digory .
" The sooner ---- "
He never finished what he was going to say for at that moment something happened .
The high - backed chair in front of the fire moved suddenly and there rose up out of it -- like a pantomime demon coming up out of a trap - door -- the alarming form of Uncle Andrew .
They were not in the empty house at all ; they were in Digory 's house and in the forbidden study !
Both children said " O-o - oh " and realised their terrible mistake .
They felt that they ought to have known all along that they had n't gone nearly far enough .
Uncle Andrew was very tall and very thin .
He had a long - clean - shaven face with a sharp nose and extremely bright eyes and a great tousled mop of grey hair .
Digory was quite speechless , for Uncle Andrew looked a thousand times more alarming than he had ever looked before .
Polly was not so frightened yet ; but she soon was .
For the very first thing Uncle Andrew did was to walk across to the door of the room , shut it , and turn the key in the lock .
Then he turned round , fixed the children with his bright eyes , and smiled , showing all his teeth .
" There ! " he said .
" Now my fool of a sister ca n't get at you ! "
It was dreadfully unlike anything a grown - up would be expected to do .
Polly 's heart came into her mouth , and she and Digory started backing towards the little door they had come in by .
Uncle Andrew was too quick for them .
He got behind them and shut that door too and stood in front of it .
Then he rubbed his hands and made his knuckles crack .
He had very long , beautifully white , fingers .
" I am delighted to see you , " he said .
" Two children are just what I wanted . "
" Please , Mr. Ketterley , " said Polly .
" I 've got to go home .
Will you let us out , please ? "
" Not just yet , " said Uncle Andrew .
" This is too good an opportunity to miss. I wanted two children .
You see , I 'm in the middle of a great experiment .
I 've tried it on a guinea - pig and it seemed to work .
But then a guinea - pig ca n't tell you anything .
And you ca n't explain to it how to come back . "
" Look here , Uncle Andrew , " said Digory , " it really is dinner time and they 'll be looking for us in a moment .
You must let us out . "
" Must ? " said Uncle Andrew .
Digory and Polly glanced at one another .
They dared not say anything , but the glances meant " Is n't this dreadful ? " and " We must humour him . "
" If you let us go for our dinner now , " said Polly , " we could come back after dinner . "
" Ah , but how do I know that you would ? " said Uncle Andrew with a cunning smile .
Then he seemed to change his mind .
" Well , well , " he said , " if you really must go , I suppose you must .
I ca n't expect two youngsters like you to find it much fun talking to an old duffer like me . "
He sighed and went on .
" You 've no idea how lonely I sometimes am .
But no matter .
Go to your dinner .
But I must give you a present before you go .
It 's not every day that I see a little girl in my dingy old study , especially , if I may say so , such a very attractive young lady as yourself . "
Polly began to think he might not really be mad after all .
" Would n't you like a ring , my dear ? " said Uncle Andrew to Polly .
" Do you mean one of those yellow or green ones ? " said Polly .
" How lovely ! "
" Not a green one , " said Uncle Andrew .
" I 'm afraid I ca n't give the green ones away .
But I 'd be delighted to give you any of the yellow ones : with my love .
Come and try one on . "
Polly had now quite got over her fright and felt sure that the old gentleman was not mad ; and there certainly something strangely attractive about those bright rings .
She moved over to the tray .
" Why !
I declare , " she said .
" That humming noise gets louder here .
It 's almost as if the rings were making it . "
" What a funny fancy , my dear , " said Uncle Andrew with a laugh .
It sounded a very natural laugh , but Digory had seen an eager , almost a greedy , look on his face .
" Polly !
Do n't be a fool ! " he shouted .
" Do n't touch them . "
It was too late .
Exactly as he spoke , Polly 's hand went out to touch one of the rings .
And immediately , without a flash or a noise or a warning of any sort , there was no Polly .
Digory and his Uncle were alone in the room .