About three weeks later the last of the Kings of Narnia sat under the great oak which grew beside the door of his little hunting lodge , where he often stayed for ten days or so in the pleasant spring weather .
It was a low , thatched building not far from the Eastern end of Lantern Waste and some way above the meeting of the two rivers .
He loved to live there simply and at ease , away from the state and pomp of Cair Paravel , the royal city .
His name was King Tirian , and he was between twenty and twenty - five years old ; his shoulders were already broad and strong and his limbs , full of hard muscle , but his beard was still scanty .
He had blue eyes and a fearless , honest face .
There was no one with him that spring morning except his dearest friend , Jewel the Unicorn .
They loved each other like brothers and each had saved the other 's life in the wars .
The lordly beast stood close beside the King 's chair , with its neck bent round polishing its blue horn against the creamy whiteness of its flank .
" I can not set myself to any work or sport to - day , Jewel , " said the King .
" I can think of nothing but this wonderful news .
Think you we shall hear more of them to - day ? "
" They are the most wonderful tidings ever heard in our days or our father 's or our grandfathers ' days , Sire , " said Jewel , " if they are true . "
" How can they choose but be true ? " said the King .
" It is more than a week ago that the first birds came flying over us saying , Aslan is here , Aslan has come to Narnia again .
And after that it was the squirrels .
They had not seen him , but they said it was certain he was in the woods .
Then came the Stag .
He said he had seen him with his own eyes , a great way off , by moonlight , in Lantern Waste .
Then came that dark Man with the beard , the merchant from Calormen .
The Calormenes care nothing for Aslan as we do ; but the man spoke of it as a thing beyond doubt .
And there was the Badger last night ; he too had seen Aslan . "
" Indeed , Sire , " answered Jewel , " I believe it all .
If I seem not to , it is only that my joy is too great to let my belief settle itself .
It is almost too beautiful to believe . "
" Yes , " said the King with a great sigh , almost a shiver , of delight .
" It is beyond all that I ever hoped for in all my life . "
" Listen ! " said Jewel , putting his head on one side and cocking his ears forward .
" What is it ? " asked the King .
" Hoofs , Sire , " said Jewel .
" A galloping horse .
A very heavy horse .
It must be one of the Centaurs .
And look , there he is . "
A great , golden - bearded Centaur , with man 's sweat on his forehead and horse 's sweat on his chestnut flanks , dashed up to the King , stopped , and bowed low .
" Hail , King , " it cried in a voice as deep as a bull 's .
" Ho , there ! " said the King , looking over his shoulder towards the door of the hunting lodge .
" A bowl of wine for the noble Centaur .
Welcome , Roonwit .
When you have found your breath , you shall tell us your errand . "
A page came out of the house carrying a great wooden bowl , curiously carved , and handed it to the Centaur .
The Centaur raised the bowl and said ,
" I drink first to Aslan and truth , Sire , and secondly to your Majesty . "
He finished the wine ( enough for six strong men ) at one draught and handed the empty bowl back to the page .
" Now , Roonwit , " said the King .
" Do you bring us more news of Aslan ? "
Roonwit looked very grave , frowning a little .
" Sire , " he said .
" You know how long I have lived and studied the stars ; for we Centaurs live longer than you Men , and even longer than your kind , Unicorn .
Never in all my days have I seen such terrible things written in the skies as there have been nightly since this year began .
The stars say nothing of the coming of Aslan , nor of peace , nor of joy .
I know by my art that there have not been such disastrous conjunctions of the planets for five hundred years .
It was already in my mind to come and warn your Majesty that some great evil hangs over Narnia .
But last night the rumour reached me that Aslan is abroad in Narnia .
Sire , do not believe this tale .
It can not be .
The stars never lie , but Men and Beasts do .
If Aslan were really coming to Narnia , the sky would have foretold it .
If he were really come , all the most gracious stars would be assembled in his honour .
It is all a lie . "
" A lie ! " said the King fiercely .
" What creature in Narnia or all the world would dare to lie on such a matter ? "
And , without knowing it , he laid his hand on his sword hilt .
" That I know not , Lord King , " said the Centaur .
" But I know there are liars on earth ; there are none among the stars . "
" I wonder , " said Jewel , " whether Aslan might not come though all the stars foretold otherwise .
He is not the slave of the stars but their Maker .
Is it not said in all the old stories that He is not a Tame Lion ? "
" Well said , well said , Jewel , " cried the King .
" Those are the very words : _not a tame lion_ .
It comes in many tales . "
Roonwit had just raised his hand and was leaning forward to say something very earnestly to the King when all three of them turned their heads to listen to a wailing sound that was quickly drawing nearer .
The wood was so thick to the west of them that they could not see the newcomer yet .
But they could soon hear the words .
" Woe , woe , woe ! " called the voice .
" Woe for my brothers and sisters !
Woe for the holy trees !
The woods are laid waste .
The axe is loosed against us .
We are being felled .
Great trees are falling , falling , falling . "
With the last " falling , " the speaker came in sight .
She was like a woman but so tall that her head was on a level with the Centaur 's : yet she was like a tree too .
It is hard to explain if you have never seen a Dryad but quite unmistakable once you have -- something different in the colour , the voice , and the hair .
King Tirian and the two Beasts knew at once that she was the nymph of a beech - tree .
" Justice , Lord King ! " she cried .
" Come to our aid .
Protect your people .
They are felling us in Lantern Waste .
Forty great trunks of my brothers and sisters are already on the ground . "
" What , Lady !
Felling Lantern Waste ?
Murdering the talking trees ? " cried the King leaping to his feet and drawing his sword .
" How dare they ?
And who dares it ?
Now by the Mane of Aslan ---- "
" A-a-a-h , " gasped the Dryad shuddering as if in pain -- shuddering time after time as if under repeated blows Then all at once she fell sideways as suddenly as if both her feet had been cut from under her .
For a second they saw her lying dead on the grass and then she vanished .
They knew what had happened .
Her tree , miles away , had been cut down .
For a moment the King 's grief and anger were so great that he could not speak .
Then he said :
" Come , friends .
We must go up river and find the villains who have done this , with all the speed we can .
I will leave not one of them alive . "
" Sire , with a good will , " said Jewel .
But Roonwit said , " Sire , be wary even in your just wrath .
There are strange doings on foot .
If there should be rebels in arms further up the valley , we three are too few to meet them .
If it would please you to wait while ---- "
" I will not wait the tenth part of a second , " said the King .
" But while Jewel and I go forward , do you gallop as hard as you may to Cair Paravel .
Here is my ring for your token .
Get me a score of men - at - arms , all well - mounted , and a score of Talking Dogs , and ten Dwarfs ( let them all be fell archers ) , and a Leopard or so , and Stonefoot the Giant .
Bring all these after us as quickly as can be . "
" With a good will , Sire , " said Roonwit .
And at once he turned and galloped Eastward down the valley .
The King strode on at a great pace , sometimes muttering to himself and sometimes clenching his fists .
Jewel walked beside him , saying nothing ; so there was no sound between them but the faint jingle of a rich gold chain that hung round the Unicorn 's neck and the noise of two feet and four hoofs .
They soon reached the River and turned up it where there was a grassy road : they had the water on their left and the forest on their right .
Soon after that they came to the place where the ground grew rougher and thick wood came down to the water 's edge .
The road , what there was of it , now ran on the southern bank and they had to ford the River to reach it .
It was up to Tirian 's armpits , but Jewel ( who had four legs and was therefore steadier ) kept on his right to break the force of the current , and Tirian put his strong arm round the Unicorn 's strong neck and they both got safely over .
The King was still so angry that he hardly noticed the cold of the water .
But of course he dried his sword very carefully on the shoulder of his cloak , which was the only dry part of him , as soon as they came to shore .
They were now going westward with the River on their right and Lantern Waste straight ahead of them .
They had not gone more than a mile when they both stopped and both spoke at the same moment .
The King said " What have we here " and Jewel said " Look ! "
" It is a raft , " said King Tirian .
And so it was .
Half a dozen splendid tree trunks , all newly cut and newly lopped of their branches , had been lashed together to make a raft , and were gliding swiftly down the River .
On the front of the raft there was a water rat with a pole to steer it .
" Hey !
Water Rat !
What are you about ? " cried the King .
" Taking logs down to sell to the Calormenes , Sire , " said the Rat , touching his ear as he might have touched his cap if he had had one .
" Calormenes ! " thundered Tirian .
" What do you mean ?
Who gave order for these trees to be felled ? "
The River flows so swiftly at that time of the year that the raft had already glided past the King and Jewel .
But the Water Rat looked back over its shoulders and shouted :
" The Lion 's orders , Sire .
Aslan himself . "
He added something more but they could n't hear it .
The King and the Unicorn stared at one another and both looked more frightened than they had ever been in any battle .
" Aslan , " said the King at last , in a very low voice .
" Aslan .
Could it be true ?
_Could_ he be felling the holy trees and murdering the Dryads ? "
" Unless the Dryads have all done something dreadfully wrong ---- " murmured Jewel .
" But selling them to Calormenes ! " said the King .
" Is it possible ? "
" I do n't know , " said Jewel miserably .
" He 's not a _tame_ Lion . "
" Well , " said the King at last , " we must go on and take the adventure that comes to us . "
" It is the only thing left for us to do , Sire , " said the Unicorn .
He did not see at the moment how foolish it was for two of them to go alone ; nor did the King .
They were too angry to think clearly .
But much evil came of their rashness in the end .
Suddenly the King leaned hard on his friend 's neck and bowed his head .
" Jewel , " he said , " What lies before us ?
Horrible thoughts arise in my heart .
If we had died before to - day we should have been happy . "
" Yes , " said Jewel .
" We have lived too long .
The worst thing in the world has come upon us . "
They stood like that for a minute or two and then went on .
Before long they could hear the hack - hack - hack of axes falling on timber , though they could see nothing yet because there was a rise of the ground in front of them .
When they had reached the top of it they could see right into Lantern Waste itself .
And the King 's face turned white when he saw it .
Right through the middle of that ancient forest -- that forest where the trees of gold and of silver had once grown and where a child from our world had once planted the Tree of Protection -- a broad lane had already been opened .
It was a hideous lane like a raw gash in the land , full of muddy ruts where felled trees had been dragged down to the river .
There was a great crowd of people at work , and a cracking of whips , and horses tugging and straining as they dragged at the logs .
The first thing that struck the King and the Unicorn was that about half the people in the crowd were not Talking Beasts but Men .
The next thing was that these men were not the fair - haired men of Narnia : they were dark , bearded men from Calormen , that great and cruel country that lies beyond Archenland across the desert to the south .
There was no reason , of course , why one should not meet a Calormene or two in Narnia -- a merchant or an ambassador -- for there was peace between Narnia and Calormen in those days .
But Tirian could not understand why there are so many of them : nor why they were cutting down a Narnian forest .
He grasped his sword tighter and rolled his cloak round his left arm .
They came quickly down among the men .
Two Calormenes were driving a horse which was harnessed to a log .
Just as the King reached them , the log got stuck in a bad muddy place .
" Get on , son of sloth !
Pull , you lazy pig ! " cried the Calormenes , cracking their whips .
The horse was already straining himself as hard as he could ; his eyes were red and he was covered with foam .
" Work , lazy brute , " shouted one of the Calormenes : and as he spoke he struck the horse savagely with his whip .
It was then that the really dreadful thing happened .
Up till now Tirian had taken it for granted that the horses which the Calormenes were driving were their own horses ; dumb , witless animals like the horses of our own world .
And though he hated to see even a dumb horse overdriven , he was of course thinking more about the murder of the Trees .
It had never crossed his mind that anyone would dare to harness one of the free Talking Horses of Narnia , much less to use a whip on it .
But as that savage blow fell the horse reared up and said , half screaming :
" Fool and tyrant !
Do you not see I am doing all I can ? "
When Tirian knew that the Horse was one of his own Narnians , there came over him and over Jewel such a rage that they did not know what they were doing .
The King 's sword went up , the Unicorn 's horn went down .
They rushed forward together .
Next moment both the Calormenes lay dead , the one beheaded by Tirian 's sword and the other gored through the heart by Jewel 's horn .