Tirian had thought -- or he would have thought if he had had time to think at all -- that they were inside a little thatched stable , about twelve feet long and six feet wide .
In reality they stood on grass , the deep blue sky was overhead , and the air which blew gently on their faces was that of a day in early summer .
Not far away from them rose a grove of trees , thickly leaved , but under every leaf there peeped out the gold or faint yellow or purple or glowing red of fruits such as no one has seen in our world .
The fruit made Tirian feel that it must be autumn : but there was something in the feel of the air that told him it could not be later than June .
They all moved towards the trees .
Everyone raised his hand to pick the fruit he best liked the look of , and then everyone paused for a second .
This fruit was so beautiful that each felt , " It ca n't be meant for me ... surely we 're not allowed to pluck it . "
" It 's all right , " said Peter .
" I know what we 're all thinking .
But I 'm sure , quite sure , we need n't .
I 've a feeling we 've got to the country where everything is allowed . "
" Here goes , then ! " said Eustace .
And they all began to eat .
What was the fruit like ?
Unfortunately , no one can describe a taste .
All I can say is that , compared with those fruits , the freshest grapefruit you 've ever eaten was dull , and the juiciest orange was dry , and the most melting pear was hard and woody , and the sweetest wild strawberry was sour .
And there were no seeds or stones , and no wasps .
If you had once eaten that fruit , all the nicest things in this world would taste like medicines after it .
But I ca n't describe it .
You ca n't find out what it is like unless you can get to that country and taste for yourself .
When they had eaten enough , Eustace said to King Peter , " You have n't yet told us how you got here .
You were just going to , when King Tirian turned up . "
" There 's not much to tell , " said Peter .
" Edmund and I were standing on the platform and we saw your train coming in .
I remember thinking it was taking the bend far too fast .
And I remember thinking how funny it was that our people were probably in the same train though Lucy did n't know about it ---- "
" Your people , High King ? " said Tirian .
" I mean my Father and Mother -- Edmund 's and Lucy 's and mine . "
" Why were they ? " asked Jill .
" You do n't mean to say _they_ know about Narnia ? "
" Oh no , it had nothing to do with Narnia .
They were on their way to Bristol .
I 'd only heard they were going that morning .
But Edmund said they 'd be bound to be going by that train . "
( Edmund was the sort of person who knows about railways ) .
" And what happened then ? " said Jill .
" Well , it 's not very easy to describe , is it , Edmund ? " said the High King .
" Not very , " said Edmund .
" It was n't at all like that other time when we were pulled out of our own world by Magic .
There was a frightful roar and something hit me with a bang , but it did n't hurt .
And I felt not so much scared as -- well , excited .
Oh -- and this is one queer thing .
I 'd had a rather sore knee , from a hack at rugger .
I noticed it had suddenly gone .
And I felt very light .
And then -- here we were . "
" It was much the same for us in the railway carriage , " said the Lord Digory , wiping the last traces of the fruit from his golden beard .
" Only I think you and I , Polly , chiefly felt that we 'd been unstiffened .
You youngsters wo n't understand .
But we stopped feeling old . "
" Youngsters , indeed ! " said Jill .
" I do n't believe you two really are much older than we are here . "
" Well if we are n't , we have been , " said the Lady Polly .
" And what has been happening since you got here ? " asked Eustace .
" Well , " said Peter , " for a long time ( at least I suppose it was a long time ) nothing happened .
Then the door opened ---- "
" The door ? " said Tirian .
" Yes , " said Peter , " The door you came in -- or came out -- by .
Have you forgotten ? "
" But where is it ? "
" Look , " said Peter and pointed .
Tirian looked and saw the queerest and most ridiculous thing you can imagine .
Only a few yards away , clear to be seen in the sunlight , there stood up a rough wooden door and , round it , the framework of the doorway : nothing else , no walls , no roof .
He walked towards it , bewildered , and the others followed , watching to see what he would do .
He walked round to the other side of the door .
But it looked just the same from the other side : he was still in the open air , on a summer morning .
The door was simply standing up by itself as if it had grown there like a tree .
" Fair Sir , " said Tirian to the High King , " this is a great marvel . "
" It is the door you came through with that Calormene five minutes ago , " said Peter smiling .
" But did I not come in out of the wood into the Stable ?
Whereas this seems to be a door leading from nowhere to nowhere . "
" It looks like that if you walk _round_ it , " said Peter .
" But put your eye to that place where there is a crack between two of the planks and look _through_ . "
Tirian put his eye to the hole .
At first he could see nothing but blackness .
Then , as his eyes grew used to it , he saw the dull red glow of a bonfire that was nearly going out , and above that , in a black sky , stars .
Then he could see dark figures moving about or standing between him and the fire : he could hear them talking and their voices were like those of Calormenes .
So he knew that he was looking out through the Stable door into the darkness of Lantern Waste where he had fought his last battle .
The men were discussing whether to go in and look for Rishda Tarkaan ( but none of them wanted to do that ) or to set fire to the Stable .
He looked round again and could hardly believe his eyes .
There was the blue sky overhead , and grassy country spreading as far as he could see in every direction , and his new friends all round him , laughing .
" It seems , then , " said Tirian , smiling himself , " that the Stable seen from within and the Stable seen from without are two different places . "
" Yes , " said the Lord Digory .
" Its inside is bigger than its outside . "
" Yes , " said Queen Lucy .
" In our world too , a Stable once had something inside it that was bigger than our whole world . "
It was the first time she had spoken , and from the thrill in her voice Tirian now knew why .
She was drinking everything in more deeply than the others .
She had been too happy to speak .
He wanted to hear her speak again , so he said :
" Of your courtesy , Madam , tell on .
Tell me your whole adventure . "
" After the shock and the noise , " said Lucy , " we found ourselves here .
And we wondered at the door , as you did .
Then the door opened for the first time ( we saw darkness through the doorway when it did ) and there came through a big man with a naked sword .
We saw by his arms that he was a Calormene .
He took his stand beside the door with his sword raised , resting on his shoulder , ready to cut down anyone who came through .
We went to him and spoke to him , but we thought he could neither see nor hear us .
And he never looked round on the sky and the sunlight and the grass : I think he could n't see them either .
So then we waited a long time .
Then we heard the bolt being drawn on the other side of the door .
But the man did n't get ready to strike with his sword till he could see who was coming .
So we supposed he had been told to strike some and spare others .
But at the very moment when the door opened , all of a sudden Tash was there , on this side of the door ; none of us saw where he came from .
And through the door there came a big Cat .
It gave one look at Tash and ran for its life : just in time , for he pounced at it and the door hit his beak as it was shut .
The man could see Tash .
He turned very pale and bowed down before the Monster : but it vanished .
" Then we waited a long time again .
At last the door opened for the third time and there came in a young Calormene .
I liked him .
The sentinel at the door started , and looked very surprised , when he saw him .
I think he 'd been expecting someone quite different ---- "
" I see it all now , " said Eustace ( he had the bad habit of interrupting stories ) .
" The Cat was to go in first and the sentry had orders to do him no harm .
Then the Cat was to come out and say he 's seen their beastly Tashlan and _pretend_ to be frightened to scare the other Animals .
But what Shift never guessed was that the real Tash would turn up ; so Ginger came out really frightened .
And after that , Shift would send in anyone he wanted to get rid of and the sentry would kill them .
And ---- "
" Friend , " said Tirian softly , " you hinder the lady in her tale . "
" Well , " said Lucy , " the sentry was surprised .
That gave the other man just time to get on guard .
They had a fight .
He killed the sentry and flung him outside the door .
Then he came walking slowly forward to where we were .
He could see us , and everything else .
We tried to talk to him but he was rather like a man in a trance .
He kept on saying , ' Tash , Tash , where is Tash ?
I go to Tash .
' So we gave it up and he went away somewhere -- over there .
I liked him .
And after that ... ugh ! "
Lucy made a face .
" After that , " said Edmund , " someone flung a monkey through the door .
And Tash was there again .
My sister is so tender - hearted she does n't like to tell you that Tash made one peck and the Monkey was gone ! "
" Serves him right ! " said Eustace .
" All the same , I hope he 'll disagree with Tash too . "
" And after that , " said Edmund , " came about a dozen Dwarfs : and then Jill , and Eustace , and last of all yourself . "
" I hope Tash ate the Dwarfs too , " said Eustace .
" Little swine . "
" No , he did n't , " said Lucy .
" And do n't be horrid .
They 're still here .
In fact you can see them from here .
And I 've tried and tried to make friends with them but it 's no use . "
" _Friends_ with them ! " cried Eustace .
" If you knew how those Dwarfs have been behaving ! "
" Oh stop it , Eustace , " said Lucy .
" Do come and see them .
King Tirian , perhaps you could do something with them . "
" I can feel no great love for Dwarfs to - day , " said Tirian .
" Yet at your asking , Lady , I would do a greater thing than this . "
Lucy led the way and soon they could all see the Dwarfs .
They had a very odd look .
They were n't strolling about or enjoying themselves ( although the cords with which they had been tied seemed to have vanished ) nor were they lying down and having a rest .
They were sitting very close together in a little circle facing one another .
They never looked round or took any notice of the humans till Lucy and Tirian were almost near enough to touch them .
Then the Dwarfs all cocked their heads as if they could n't see any one but were listening hard and trying to guess by the sound what was happening .
" Look out ! " said one of them in a surly voice .
" Mind where you 're going .
Do n't walk into our faces ! "
" All right ! " said Eustace indignantly .
" We 're not blind .
We 've got eyes in our heads . "
" They must be darn good ones if you can see in here , " said the same Dwarf whose name was Diggle .
" In where ? " asked Edmund .
" Why you bone - head , in _here_ of course , " said Diggle .
" In this pitch - black , poky , smelly little hole of a stable . "
" Are you blind ? " said Tirian .
" Ai n't we all blind in the dark ! " said Diggle .
" But it is n't dark , you poor stupid Dwarfs , " said Lucy .
" Ca n't you see ?
Look up !
Look round !
Ca n't you see the sky and the trees and the flowers ?
Ca n't you see _me_ ? "
" How in the name of all Humbug can I see what ai n't there ?
And how can I see you any more than you can see me in this pitch darkness ? "
" But I _can_ see you , " said Lucy .
" I 'll prove I can see you .
You 've got a pipe in your mouth . "
" Anyone that knows the smell of baccy could tell that , " said Diggle .
" Oh the poor things !
This is dreadful , " said Lucy .
Then she had an idea .
She stooped and picked some wild violets .
" Listen , Dwarf , " she said .
" Even if your eyes are wrong , perhaps your nose is all right : can you smell _that_ . "
She leaned across and held the fresh , damp flowers to Diggle 's ugly nose .
But she had to jump back quickly in order to avoid a blow from his hard little fist .
" None of that ! " he shouted .
" How dare you !
What do you mean by shoving a lot of filthy stable - litter in my face ?
There was a thistle in it too .
It 's like your sauce !
And who are you anyway ? "
" Earth - man , " said Tirian , " she is the Queen Lucy , sent hither by Aslan out of the deep past .
And it is for her sake alone that I , Tirian , your lawful King , do not cut all your heads from your shoulders , proved and twice - proved traitors that you are . "
" Well if that does n't beat everything ! " exclaimed Diggle .
" How _can_ you go on talking all that rot ?
Your wonderful Lion did n't come and help you , did he ?
Thought not .
And now -- even now -- when you 've been beaten and shoved into this black hole , just the same as the rest of us , you 're still at your old game .
Starting a new lie !
Trying to make us believe we 're none of us shut up , and it ai n't dark , and heaven knows what . "
" There is no black hole , save in your own fancy , fool , " cried Tirian .
" Come _out of_ it . "
And , leaning forward , he caught Diggle by the belt and the hood and swung him right out of the circle of Dwarfs .
But the moment Tirian put him down , Diggle darted back to his place among the others , rubbing his nose and howling :
" Ow !
Ow !
What d'you do that for !
Banging my face against the wall .
You 've nearly broken my nose . "
" Oh dear ! " said Lucy " What _are_ we to do for them ? "
" Let 'em alone , " said Eustace : but as he spoke the earth trembled .
The sweet air grew suddenly sweeter .
A brightness flashed behind them .
All turned .
Tirian turned last because he was afraid .
There stood his heart 's desire , huge and real , the golden Lion , Aslan himself , and already the others were kneeling in a circle round his forepaws and burying their hands and faces in his mane as he stooped his great head to touch them with his tongue .
Then he fixed his eyes upon Tirian , and Tirian came near , trembling , and flung himself at the Lion 's feet , and the Lion kissed him and said , " Well done , last of the Kings of Narnia who stood firm at the darkest hour . "
" Aslan , " said Lucy through her tears , " could you -- will you -- do something for these poor Dwarfs ? "
" Dearest , " said Aslan , " I will show you both what I can , and what I can not , do . "
He came close to the Dwarfs and gave a low growl : low , but it set all the air shaking .
But the Dwarfs said to one another , " Hear that ?
That 's the gang at the other end of the Stable .
Trying to frighten us .
They do it with a machine of some kind .
Do n't take any notice .
They wo n't take _us_ in again ! "
Aslan raised his head and shook his mane .
Instantly a glorious feast appeared on the Dwarfs ' knees : pies and tongues and pigeons and trifles and ices , and each Dwarf had a goblet of good wine in his right hand .
But it was n't much use .
They began eating and drinking greedily enough , but it was clear that they could n't taste it properly .
They thought they were eating and drinking only the sort of things you might find in a Stable .
One said he was trying to eat hay and another said he had got a bit of an old turnip and a third said he 'd found a raw cabbage leaf .
And they raised golden goblets of rich red wine to their lips and said " Ugh !
Fancy drinking dirty water out of a trough that a donkey 's been at !
Never thought we 'd come to this . "
But very soon every Dwarf began suspecting that every other Dwarf had found something nicer than he had , and they started grabbing and snatching , and went on to quarrelling , till in a few minutes there was a free fight and all the good food was smeared on their faces and clothes or trodden under foot .
But when at last they sat down to nurse their black eyes and their bleeding noses , they all said :
" Well , at any rate there 's no Humbug here .
We have n't let anyone take us in .
The Dwarfs are for the Dwarfs . "
" You see , " said Aslan .
" They will not let us help them .
They have chosen cunning instead of belief .
Their prison is only in their own minds , yet they are in that prison ; and so afraid of being taken in that they can not be taken out .
But come , children .
I have other work to do . "
He went to the Door and they all followed him .
He raised his head and roared " Now it is time ! " then louder " Time ! "
; then so loud that it could have shaken the stars , " TIME . "
The Door flew open .