If one could run without getting tired , I do n't think one would often want to do anything else .
But there might be special reasons for stopping , and it was a special reason which made Eustace presently shout :
" I say !
Steady !
Look what we 're coming to ! "
And well he might .
For now they saw before them Caldron Pool and beyond the Pool , the high unclimbable cliffs and , pouring down the cliffs , thousands of tons of water every second , flashing like diamonds in some places and dark , glassy green in others , the Great Waterfall ; and already the thunder of it was in their ears .
" Do n't stop !
Further up and further in , " called Farsight , tilting his flight a little upwards .
" It 's all very well for him , " said Eustace , but Jewel also cried out :
" Do n't stop .
Further up and further in !
Take it in your stride . "
His voice could only just be heard above the roar of the water but next moment everyone saw that he had plunged into the Pool .
And helter - skelter behind him , with splash after splash , all the others did the same .
The water was not bitingly cold as all of them ( and especially Puzzle ) expected , but of a delicious foamy coolness .
They all found they were swimming straight for the Waterfall itself .
" This is absolutely crazy , " said Eustace to Edmund .
" I know .
And yet ---- " said Edmund .
" Is n't it wonderful ? " said Lucy .
" Have you noticed one ca n't feel afraid , even if one wants to ?
Try it . "
" By Jove , one ca n't , " said Eustace after he had tried .
Jewel reached the foot of the Waterfall first , but Tirian was only just behind him .
Jill was last , so she could see the whole thing better than the others .
She saw something white moving steadily up the face of the Waterfall .
That white thing was the Unicorn .
You could n't tell whether he was swimming or climbing , but he moved on , higher and higher .
The point of his horn divided the water just above his head , and it cascaded out in two rainbow - coloured streams all round his shoulders .
Just behind him came King Tirian .
He moved his legs and arms as if he were swimming but he moved straight upwards : as if one could swim up a wall .
What looked funniest was the Dogs .
During the gallop they had not been at all out of breath , but now , as they swarmed and wriggled upwards , there was plenty of spluttering and sneezing among them ; that was because they would keep on barking , and every time they barked they got their mouths and noses full of water .
But before Jill had time to notice all these things fully , she was going up the Waterfall herself .
It was the sort of thing that would have been quite impossible in our world .
Even if you had n't been drowned , you would have been smashed to pieces by the terrible weight of water against the countless jags of rock .
But in that world you could do it .
You went on , up and up , with all kinds of reflected lights flashing at you from the water and all manner of coloured stones flashing through it , till it seemed as if you were climbing up light itself -- and always higher and higher till the sense of height would have terrified you if you could be terrified , but here it was only gloriously exciting .
And then at last one came to the lovely , smooth green curve in which the water poured over the top and found that one was out on the level river above the waterfall .
The current was racing away behind you , but you were such a wonderful swimmer that you could make headway against it .
Soon they were all on the bank , dripping but happy .
A long valley opened ahead and great snow - mountains , now much nearer , stood up against the sky .
" Further up and further in , " cried Jewel and instantly they were off again .
They were out of Narnia now and up into the Western Wild which neither Tirian nor Peter nor even the Eagle had ever seen before .
But the Lord Digory and the Lady Polly had .
" Do you remember ?
Do you remember ? " they said -- and said it in steady voices too , without panting , though the whole party was now running faster than an arrow flies .
" What , Lord ? " said Tirian .
" Is it then true , as stories tell , that you two journeyed here on the very day the world was made ? "
" Yes , " said Digory , " and it seems to me as if it were only yesterday . "
" And on a flying horse ? " asked Tirian .
" Is that part true ? "
" Certainly , " said Digory .
But the Dogs barked , " Faster , faster ! "
So they ran faster and faster till it was more like flying than running , and even the Eagle overhead was going no faster than they .
And they went through winding valley after winding valley and up the steep sides of hills and , faster than ever , down the other sides , following the river and sometimes crossing it and skimming across mountain - lakes as if they were living speedboats , till at last at the far end of one long lake , which looked as blue as a turquoise , they saw a smooth green hill .
Its sides were as steep as the sides of a pyramid and round the very top of it ran a green wall : but above the wall rose the branches of trees , whose leaves looked like silver and their fruit like gold .
" Further up and further in ! " roared the Unicorn , and no one held back .
They charged straight at the foot of the hill and then found themselves running up it almost as water from a broken wave runs up a rock out at the point of some bay .
Though the slope was nearly as steep as the roof of a house and the grass was smooth as a bowling green , no one slipped .
Only when they had reached the very top did they slow up ; that was because they found themselves facing great golden gates .
And for a moment none of them was bold enough to try if the gates would open .
They all felt just as they had felt about the fruit -- " Dare we ?
Is it right ?
Can it be meant for us ? "
But while they were standing thus a great horn , wonderfully loud and sweet , blew from somewhere inside that walled garden and the gates swung open .
Tirian stood holding his breath and wondering who would come out .
And what came out was the last thing he had expected : a little , sleek , bright - eyed Talking Mouse with a red feather stuck in a circlet on its head and its left paw resting on a long sword .
It bowed , a most beautiful bow , and said in its shrill voice :
" Welcome , in the Lion 's name .
Come further up and further in . "
Then Tirian saw King Peter and King Edmund and Queen Lucy rush forward to kneel down and greet the Mouse and they all cried out , " Reepicheep ! "
And Tirian breathed fast with the sheer wonder of it , for now he knew that he was looking at one of the great heroes of Narnia , Reepicheep the Mouse , who had fought at the great Battle of Beruna and afterwards sailed to the World 's end with King Caspian the Seafarer .
But before he had had much time to think of this , he felt two strong arms thrown about him and felt a bearded kiss on his cheeks and heard a well - remembered voice saying :
" What , lad ?
Art thicker and taller since I last touched thee ? "
It was his own father , the good King Erlian : but not as Tirian had seen him last when they brought him home pale and wounded from his fight with the giant , nor even as Tirian remembered him in his later years when he was a grey - headed warrior .
This was his father young and merry as he could just remember him from very early days , when he himself had been a little boy playing games with his father in the castle garden at Cair Paravel , just before bedtime on summer evenings .
The very smell of the bread - and - milk he used to have for supper came back to him .
Jewel thought to himself , " I will leave them to talk for a little and then I will go and greet the good King Erlian .
Many a bright apple did he give me when I was but a colt . "
But next moment he had something else to think of , for out of the gateway there came a horse so mighty and noble that even a Unicorn might feel shy in its presence : a great winged horse .
It looked a moment at the Lord Digory and the Lady Polly and neighed out " What , cousins ! " and they both shouted " Fledge !
Good old Fledge ! " and rushed to kiss it .
But by now the Mouse was again urging them to come in .
So all of them passed in through the golden gates , into the delicious smell that blew towards them out of that garden and into the cool mixture of sunlight and shadow under the trees , walking on springy turf that was all dotted with white flowers .
The very first thing which struck everyone was that the place was far larger than it had seemed from outside .
But no one had time to think about that for people were coming up to meet the newcomers from every direction .
Everyone you had ever heard of ( if you knew the history of those countries ) seemed to be there .
There was Glimfeather the Owl and Puddleglum the Marshwiggle , and King Rilian the Disenchanted , and his mother , the Star 's daughter , and his great father , Caspian himself .
And close beside him were the Lord Drinian and the Lord Berne and Trumpkin the Dwarf and Trufflehunter , the Good Badger , with Glenstorm the Centaur and a hundred other heroes of the great War of Deliverance .
And then from another side came Cor the King of Archenland with King Lune , his father , and his wife , Queen Aravis and the brave prince , Corin Thunder - Fist , his brother and Bree the Horse and Hwin the Mare .
And then -- which was a wonder beyond all wonders to Tirian -- there came from further away in the past , the two good Beavers and Tumnus the Faun .
And there was greeting and kissing and handshaking and old jokes revived , ( you 've no idea how good an old joke sounds when you take it out again after a rest of five or six hundred years ) and the whole company moved forward to the centre of the orchard where the Phoenix sat in a tree and looked down upon them all and at the foot of that tree were two thrones and in those two thrones , a King and Queen so great and beautiful that everyone bowed down before them .
And well they might , for these two were King Frank and Queen Helen from whom all the most ancient Kings of Narnia and Archenland are descended .
And Tirian felt as you would feel if you were brought before Adam and Eve in all their glory .
About half an hour later -- or it might have been half a hundred years later , for time there is not like time here -- Lucy stood with her dear friend , her oldest Narnian friend , the Faun Tumnus , looking down over the wall of that garden , and seeing all Narnia spread out below .
But when you looked down you found that this hill was much higher than you had thought : it sank down with shining cliffs , thousands of feet below them and trees in that lower world looked no bigger than grains of green salt .
Then she turned inward again and stood with her back to the wall and looked at the garden .
" I see , " she said at last , thoughtfully .
" I see now .
This garden is like the Stable .
It is far bigger inside than it was outside . "
" Of course , Daughter of Eve , " said the Faun .
" The further up and the further in you go , the bigger everything gets .
The inside is larger than the outside . "
Lucy looked hard at the garden and saw that it was not really a garden at all but a whole world , with its own rivers and woods and sea and mountains .
But they were not strange : she knew them all .
" I see , " she said .
" This is still Narnia , and , more real and more beautiful than the Narnia down below , just as it was more real and more beautiful than the Narnia outside the Stable door !
I see ... world within world , Narnia within Narnia .... "
" Yes , " said Mr. Tumnus , " like an onion : except that as you continue to go in and in , each circle is larger than the last . "
And Lucy looked this way and that and soon found that a new and beautiful thing had happened to her .
Whatever she looked at , however far away it might be , once she had fixed her eyes steadily on it , became quite clear and close as if she were looking through a telescope .
She could see the whole southern desert and beyond it the great city of Tashbaan : to eastward she could see Cair Paravel on the edge of the sea and the very window of the room that had once been her own .
And far out to sea she could discover the islands , island after island to the end of the world , and , beyond the end , the huge mountain which they had called Aslan 's country .
But now she saw that it was part of a great chain of mountains which ringed round the whole world .
In front of her it seemed to come quite close .
Then she looked to her left and saw what she took to be a great bank of brightly - coloured cloud , cut off from them by a gap .
But she looked harder and saw that it was not a cloud at all but a real land .
And when she had fixed her eyes on one particular spot of it , she at once cried out , " Peter !
Edmund !
Come and look !
Come quickly . "
And they came and looked , for their eyes also had become like hers .
" Why ! " exclaimed Peter .
" It 's England .
And that 's the house itself -- Professor Kirk 's old home in the country where all our adventures began ! "
" I thought that house had been destroyed , " said Edmund .
" So it was , " said the Faun .
" But you are now looking at the England within England , the real England just as this is the real Narnia .
And in that inner England no good thing is destroyed . "
Suddenly they shifted their eyes to another spot , and then Peter and Edmund and Lucy gasped with amazement and shouted out and began waving : for there they saw their own father and mother , waving back at them across the great , deep valley .
It was like when you see people waving at you from the deck of a big ship when you are waiting on the quay to meet them .
" How can we get at them ? " said Lucy .
" That is easy , " said Mr. Tumnus .
" That country and this country -- all the _real_ countries -- are only spurs jutting out from the great mountains of Aslan .
We have only to walk along the ridge , upward and inward , till it joins on .
And listen !
There is King Frank 's horn : we must all go up . "
And soon they found themselves all walking together -- and a great , bright procession it was -- up towards mountains higher than you could see in this world even if they were there to be seen .
But there was no snow on those mountains : there were forests and green slopes and sweet orchards and flashing waterfalls , one above the other , going up for ever .
And the land they were walking on grew narrower all the time , with a deep valley on each side : and across that valley the land which was the real England grew nearer and nearer .
The light ahead was growing stronger .
Lucy saw that a great series of many - coloured cliffs led up in front of them like a giant 's staircase .
And then she forgot everything else , because Aslan himself was coming , leaping down from cliff to cliff like a living cataract of power and beauty .
And the very first person whom Aslan called to him was Puzzle the Donkey .
You never saw a donkey look feebler and sillier than Puzzle did as he walked up to Aslan ; and he looked , beside Aslan , as small as a kitten looks beside a St. Bernard .
The Lion bowed down his head and whispered something to Puzzle at which his long ears went down ; but then he said something else at which the ears perked up again .
The humans could n't hear what he had said either time .
Then Aslan turned to them and said :
" You do not yet look so happy as I mean you to be . "
Lucy said , " We 're so afraid of being sent away , Aslan .
And you have sent us back into our own world so often . "
" No fear of that , " said Aslan .
" Have you not guessed ? "
Their hearts leaped and a wild hope rose within them .
" There _was_ a real railway accident , " said Aslan softly .
" Your father and mother and all of you are -- as you used to call it in the Shadow - Lands -- dead .
The term is over : the holidays have begun .
The dream is ended : this is the morning . "
And as He spoke He no longer looked to them like a lion ; but the things that began to happen after that were so great and beautiful that I can not write them .
And for us this is the end of all the stories , and we can most truly say that they all lived happily ever after .
But for them it was only the beginning of the real story .
All their life in this world and all their adventures in Narnia had only been the cover and the title page : now at last they were beginning Chapter One of the Great Story , which no one on earth has read : which goes on for ever : in which every chapter is better than the one before .