In the shadow of the trees on the far side of the clearing something was moving .
It was gliding very slowly Northward .
At first glance you might have mistaken it for smoke , for it was grey and you could see things through it .
But the deathly smell was not the smell of smoke .
Also , this thing kept its shape instead of billowing and curling as smoke would have done .
It was roughly the shape of a man but it had the head of a bird ; some bird of prey with a cruel , curved beak .
It had four arms which it held high above its head , stretching them out Northward as if it wanted to snatch all Narnia in its grip ; and its fingers -- all twenty of them -- were curved like its beak and had long , pointed , bird - like claws instead of nails .
It floated on the grass instead of walking , and the grass seemed to wither beneath it .
After one look at it Puzzle gave a screaming bray and darted into the Tower .
And Jill ( who was no coward , as you know ) hid her face in her hands to shut out the sight of it .
The others watched it for perhaps a minute , until it streamed away into the thicker trees on their right and disappeared .
Then the sun came out again , and the birds once more began to sing .
Everyone started breathing properly again and moved .
They had all been still as statues while it was in sight .
" What was it ? " said Eustace in a whisper .
" I have seen it once before , " said Tirian .
" But that time it was carved in stone and overlaid with gold and had solid diamonds for eyes .
It was when I was no older than thou , and had gone as a guest to the Tisroc 's court in Tashbaan .
He took me into the great temple of Tash .
There I saw it , carved above the altar . "
" Then that -- that thing -- was Tash ? " said Eustace .
But instead of answering him Tirian slipped his arm behind Jill 's shoulders and said , " How is it with you , Lady ? "
" A-all right , " said Jill , taking her hands away from her pale face and trying to smile .
" I 'm all right .
It only made me feel a little sick for a moment . "
" It seems , then , " said the Unicorn , " That there is a real Tash , after all . "
" Yes , " said the Dwarf .
" And this fool of an Ape , who did n't believe in Tash , will get more than he bargained for !
He called for Tash : Tash has come . "
" Where has it -- he -- the Thing -- gone to ? " said Jill .
" North into the heart of Narnia , " said Tirian .
" It has come to dwell among us .
They have called it and it has come . "
" Ho , ho , ho ! " chuckled the Dwarf , rubbing its hairy hands together .
" It will be a surprise for the Ape .
People should n't call for demons unless they really mean what they say . "
" Who knows if Tash will be visible to the Ape ? " said Jewel .
" Where has Puzzle got to ? " said Eustace .
They all shouted out Puzzle 's name and Jill went round to the other side of the Tower to see if he had gone there .
They were quite tired of looking for him when at last his large grey head peered cautiously out of the doorway and he said , " Has it gone away ? "
And when at last they got him to come out , he was shivering the way a dog shivers before a thunderstorm .
" I see now , " said Puzzle , " that I really have been a very bad donkey .
I ought never to have listened to Shift .
I never thought things like this would begin to happen . "
" If you 'd spent less time saying you were n't clever and more time trying to be as clever as you could ---- " began Eustace but Jill interrupted him .
" Oh leave poor old Puzzle alone , " she said .
" It was all a mistake ; was n't it , Puzzle dear ? "
And she kissed him on the nose .
Though rather shaken by what they had seen , the whole party now sat down again and went on with their talk .
Jewel had little to tell them .
While he was a prisoner he had spent nearly all his time tied up at the back of the Stable , and had of course heard none of the enemies ' plans .
He had been kicked ( he 'd done some kicking back too ) and beaten and threatened with death unless he would say that he believed it was Aslan who was brought out and shown to them by firelight every night .
In fact he was going to be executed this very morning if he had not been rescued .
He did n't know what had happened to the Lamb .
The question they had to decide was whether they would go to Stable Hill again that night , show Puzzle to the Narnians and try to make them see how they had been tricked , or whether they should steal away eastward to meet the help which Roonwit the Centaur was bringing up from Cair Paravel and return against the Ape and his Calormenes in force .
Tirian would very much like to have followed the first plan : he hated the idea of leaving the Ape to bully his people one moment longer than need be .
On the other hand , the way the Dwarfs had behaved last night was a warning .
Apparently one could n't be sure how people would take it even if he showed them Puzzle .
And there were the Calormene soldiers to be reckoned with .
Poggin thought there were about thirty of them .
Tirian felt sure that if the Narnians all rallied to his side , he and Jewel and the children and Poggin ( Puzzle did n't count for much ) would have a good chance of beating them .
But how if half the Narnians -- including all the Dwarfs -- just sat and looked on ? or even fought against him ?
The risk was too great .
And there was , too , the cloudy shape of Tash .
What might it do ?
And then , as Poggin pointed out , there was no harm in leaving the Ape to deal with his own difficulties for a day or two .
He would have no Puzzle to bring out and show now .
It was n't easy to see what story he -- or Ginger -- could make up to explain that .
If the Beasts asked night after night to see Aslan , and no Aslan was brought out , surely even the simplest of them would get suspicious .
In the end they all agreed that the best thing was to go off and try to meet Roonwit .
As soon as they had decided this , it was wonderful how much more cheerful everyone became .
I do n't honestly think that this was because any of them was afraid of a fight ( except perhaps Jill and Eustace ) .
But I daresay that each of them , deep down inside was very glad not to go any nearer -- or not yet -- to that horrible bird - headed thing which , visible or invisible , was now probably haunting Stable Hill .
Anyway , one always feels better when one has made up one 's mind .
Tirian said they had better remove their disguises , as they did n't want to be mistaken for Calormenes and perhaps attacked by any loyal Narnians they might meet .
The Dwarf made up a horrid - looking mess of ashes from the hearth and grease out of the jar of grease , which was kept for rubbing on swords and spearheads .
Then they took off their Calormene armour and went down to the stream .
The nasty mixture made a lather just like soft soap : it was a pleasant , homely sight to see Tirian and the two children kneeling beside the water and scrubbing the backs of their necks or puffing and blowing as they splashed the lather off .
Then they went back to the Tower with red , shiny faces , looking like people who have been given an extra-specially good wash before a party .
They re-armed themselves in true Narnian style with straight swords and three - cornered shields .
" Body of me , " said Tirian .
" That is better .
I feel a true man again . "
Puzzle begged very hard to have the lionskin taken off him .
He said it was too hot and the way it was rucked up on his back was uncomfortable : also , it made him look so silly .
But they told him he would have to wear it a bit longer , for they still wanted to show him in that get - up to the other Beasts , even though they were now going to meet Roonwit first .
What was left of the pigeon meat and rabbit meat was not worth bringing away but they took some biscuits .
Then Tirian locked the door of the Tower and that was the end of their stay there .
It was a little after two in the afternoon when they set out , and it was the first really warm day of that spring .
The young leaves seemed to be much further out than yesterday : the snowdrops were over , but they saw several primroses .
The sunlight slanted through the trees , birds sang , and always ( though usually out of sight ) there was the noise of running water .
It was hard to think of horrible things like Tash .
The children felt , " This is really Narnia at last . "
Even Tirian 's heart grew lighter as he walked ahead of them , humming an old Narnian marching song which had the refrain :
Ho , rumble , rumble , rumble , rumble , Rumble drum belaboured .
After the King came Eustace and Poggin the Dwarf .
Poggin was telling Eustace the names of all the Narnian trees , birds , and plants which he did n't know already .
Sometimes Eustace would tell him about English ones .
After them came Puzzle , and after him Jill and Jewel walking very close together .
Jill had , as you might say , quite fallen in love with the Unicorn .
She thought -- and she was n't far wrong -- that he was the shiningest , delicatest , most graceful animal she had ever met : and he was so gentle and soft of speech that , if you had n't known , you would hardly have believed how fierce and terrible he could be in battle .
" Oh , this is nice ! " said Jill .
" Just walking along like this .
I wish there could be more of _this_ sort of adventure .
It 's a pity there 's always so much happening in Narnia . "
But the Unicorn explained to her that she was quite mistaken .
He said that the Sons and Daughters of Adam and Eve were brought out of their own strange world into Narnia only at times when Narnia was stirred and upset , but she must n't think it was always like that .
In between their visits there were hundreds and thousands of years when peaceful King followed peaceful King till you could hardly remember their names or count their numbers , and there was really hardly anything to put into the History Books .
And he went on to talk of old Queens and heroes whom she had never heard of .
He spoke of Swanwhite the Queen who had lived before the days of the White Witch and the Great Winter , who was so beautiful that when she looked into any forest pool the reflection of her face shone out of the water like a star by night for a year and a day afterwards .
He spoke of Moonwood the Hare , who had such ears that he could sit by Caldron Pool under the thunder of the great waterfall and hear what men spoke in whispers at Cair Paravel .
He told how King Gale , who was ninth in descent from Frank the first of all Kings , had sailed far away into the Eastern seas and delivered the Lone Islanders from a dragon and how , in return , they had given him the Lone Islands to be part of the royal lands of Narnia for ever .
He talked of whole centuries in which all Narnia was so happy that notable dances and feasts , or at most tournaments , were the only things that could be remembered , and every day and week had been better than the last .
And as he went on , the picture of all those happy years , all the thousands of them , piled up in Jill 's mind till it was rather like looking down from a high hill onto a rich , lovely plain full of woods and waters and cornfields , which spread away and away till it got thin and misty from distance .
And she said :
" Oh , I do hope we can soon settle the Ape and get back to those good , ordinary times .
And then I hope they 'll go on for ever and ever and ever .
_Our_ world is going to have an end some day .
Perhaps this one wo n't .
Oh , Jewel -- would n't it be lovely if Narnia just went on and on -- like what you said it has been ? "
" Nay , sister , " answered Jewel , " all worlds draw to an end ; except Aslan 's own country . "
" Well , at least , " said Jill , " I hope the end of this one is millions of millions of millions of years away -- hullo ! what are we stopping for ? "
The King and Eustace and the Dwarf were all staring up at the sky .
Jill shuddered , remembering what horrors they had seen already .
But it was nothing of that sort this time .
It was small , and looked black against the blue .
" I dare swear , " said the Unicorn , " from its flight , that it is a Talking bird . "
" So think I , " said the King .
" But is it a friend , or a spy of the Ape 's ? "
" To me , Sire , " said the Dwarf , " it has a look of Farsight the Eagle . "
" Ought we to hide under the trees ! " said Eustace .
" Nay , " said Tirian , " best stand still as rocks .
He would see us for certain if we moved . "
" Look !
He wheels , he has seen us already , " said Jewel , " He is coming down in wide circles . "
" Arrow on string , Lady , " said Tirian to Jill .
" But by no means shoot till I bid you .
He may be a friend . "
If one had known what was going to happen next , it would have been a treat to watch the grace and ease with which the huge bird glided down .
He alighted on a rocky crag a few feet from Tirian , bowed his crested head , and said in his strange eagle 's voice , " Hail , King . "
" Hail , Farsight , " said Tirian .
" And since you call me King , I may well believe you are not a follower of the Ape and his false Aslan .
I am glad of your coming . "
" Sire , " said the Eagle , " when you have heard my news you will be sorrier at my coming than of the greatest woe that ever befell you . "
Tirian 's heart seemed to stop beating at these words , but he set his teeth and said " Tell on . "
" Two sights have I seen , " said Farsight .
" One was Cair Paravel filled with dead Narnians and living Calormenes : the Tisrocs banner advanced upon your royal battlements : and your subjects flying from the city -- this way and that , into the woods .
Cair Paravel was taken from the sea .
Twenty great ships of Calormen put in there in the dark of the night before last night . "
No one could speak .
" And the other sight , five leagues nearer than Cair Paravel , was Roonwit the Centaur lying dead with Calormene arrow in his side .
I was with him in his last hour and he gave me this message to your Majesty : to remember that all worlds draw to an end and that noble death is a treasure which no one is too poor to buy . "
" So , " said the King , after a long silence , " Narnia is no more . "