For a long time they could not speak nor even shed a tear .
Then the Unicorn stamped the ground with his hoof , and shook his mane , and spoke .
" Sire , " he said , " There is now no need of counsel .
We see that the Ape 's plans were laid deeper than we dreamed .
Doubtless he has been long in secret traffic with the Tisroc , and as soon as he had found the lionskin , he sent him word to make ready his navy for the taking of Cair Paravel and all Narnia .
Nothing now remains for us seven but to go back to Stable Hill , proclaim the truth , and take the adventure that Aslan sends us .
And if , by a great marvel , we defeat those thirty Calormenes who are with the Ape , then to turn again and die in battle with the far greater host of them that will soon march from Cair Paravel . "
Tirian nodded .
But he turned to the children and said : " Now , friends , it is time for you to go hence into your own world .
Doubtless you have done all that you were sent to do . "
" B -- but we 've done nothing , " said Jill who was shivering , not with fear exactly but because everything was horrible .
" Nay , " said the King , " you loosed me from the tree : you glided before me like a snake last night in the wood and took Puzzle : and you , Eustace , killed your man .
But you are too young to share in such a bloody end as we others must meet to - night or , it may be , three days hence .
I entreat you -- nay , I command you -- to return to your own place .
I should be put to shame if I let such young warriors fall in battle on my side . "
" No , no , no , " said Jill ( very white when she began speaking and then suddenly very red and then white again ) .
" We wo n't , I do n't care what you say .
We 're going to stick with you whatever happens , are n't we , Eustace ? "
" Yes , but there 's no need to get so worked up about it , " said Eustace who had stuck his hands in his pockets ( forgetting how very odd that looks when you are wearing a mail shirt ) .
" Because you see , we have n't any choice .
What 's the good of talking about our going back !
How ?
We 've got no magic for doing it ! "
This was very good sense but , at the moment , Jill hated Eustace for saying it .
He was fond of being dreadfully matter - of - fact when other people got excited .
When Tirian realised that the two strangers could not get home ( unless Aslan suddenly whisked them away ) he next wanted them to go across the southern mountains into Archenland where they might possibly be safe .
But they did n't know their way and there was no one to send with them .
Also , as Poggin said , once the Calormenes had Narnia they would certainly take Archenland in the next week or so : the Tisroc had always wanted to have these Northern countries for his own .
In the end Eustace and Jill begged so hard that Tirian said they could come with him and take their chance -- or , as he much more sensibly called it " the adventure that Aslan would send them . "
The King 's first idea was that they should not go back to Stable Hill -- they were sick of the very name of it by now -- till after dark .
But the Dwarf told them that if they arrived here by daylight they would probably find the place deserted , except perhaps for a Calormene sentry .
The Beasts were far too frightened by what the Ape ( and Ginger ) had told them about this new angry Aslan -- or Tashlan -- to go near it except when they were called together for those horrible midnight meetings .
And Calormenes are never good woodsmen .
Poggin thought that even by daylight they could easily get round to somewhere behind the stable without being seen .
This would be much harder to do when the night had come and the Ape might be calling the Beasts together and all the Calormenes were on duty .
And when the meeting did begin they could leave Puzzle at the back of the stable , completely out of sight , till the moment at which they wanted to produce him .
This was obviously a good thing : for their only chance was to give the Narnians a sudden surprise .
Everyone agreed and the whole party set off on a new line -- north - west -- towards the hated Hill .
The Eagle sometimes flew to and fro above them , sometimes he sat perched on Puzzle 's back .
No one -- not even the King himself except in some great need -- would dream of _riding_ on a Unicorn .
This time Jill and Eustace walked together .
They had been feeling very brave when they were begging to be allowed to come with the others , but now they did n't feel brave at all .
" Pole , " said Eustace in a whisper .
" I may as well tell you I 've got the wind up . "
" Oh _you're_ all right , Scrubb , " said Jill .
" You can fight .
But I -- I 'm just shaking , if you want to know the truth . "
" Oh shaking 's nothing , " said Eustace .
" I 'm feeling I 'm going to be sick . "
" Do n't talk about _that_ , for goodness ' sake , " said Jill .
They went on in silence for a minute or two .
" Pole , " said Eustace presently .
" What ? " said she .
" What 'll happen if we get killed here ? "
" Well , we 'll be dead , I suppose . "
" But I mean , what will happen in our own world ?
Shall we wake up and find ourselves back in that train ?
Or shall we just vanish and never be heard of any more ?
Or shall we be dead in England ? "
" Gosh .
I never thought of that . "
" It 'll be rum for Peter and the others if they saw me waving out of the window and then when the train comes in we 're nowhere to be found !
Or if they found two -- I mean , if we 're dead over there in England . "
" Ugh ! " said Jill .
" What a horrid idea . "
" It would n't be horrid for _us_ , " said Eustace .
" _We_ should n't be there . "
" I almost wish -- no I do n't , though , " said Jill .
" What were you going to say ? "
" I was going to say I wished we 'd never come .
But I do n't , I do n't , I do n't .
Even if we _are_ killed .
I 'd rather be killed fighting for Narnia than grow old and stupid at home and perhaps go about in a bathchair and then die in the end just the same . "
" Or be smashed up by British Railways ! "
" Why d'you say that ? "
" Well when that awful jerk came -- the one that seemed to throw us into Narnia -- I thought it was the beginning of a railway accident .
So I was jolly glad to find ourselves here instead . "
While Jill and Eustace were talking about this , the others were discussing their plans and becoming less miserable .
That was because they were now thinking of what was to be done this very night and the thought of what had happened to Narnia -- the thought that all her glories and joys were over -- was pushed away into the back part of their minds .
The moment they stopped talking it would come out and make them wretched again : but they kept on talking .
Poggin was really quite cheerful about the nights ' work they had to do .
He was sure that the Boar and the Bear , and probably all the Dogs would come over to their side at once .
And he could n't believe that all the other Dwarfs would stick to Griffle .
And fighting by firelight and in and out among trees would be an advantage to the weaker side .
And then , if they could win tonight , need they really throw their lives away by meeting the main Calormene army a few days later ?
Why not hide in the woods , or even up in the Western Waste beyond the great waterfall and live like outlaws ?
And they might gradually get stronger and stronger , for Talking Beasts and Archenlanders would be joining them every day .
And at last they 'd come out of hiding and sweep the Calormenes ( who would have got careless by then ) out of the country and Narnia would be revived .
After all , something very like that had happened in the time of King Miraz !
And Tirian heard all this and thought " But what about Tash ? " and felt in his bones that none of it was going to happen .
But he did n't say so .
When they got nearer to Stable Hill of course everyone became quiet .
Then the real wood - work began .
From the moment at which they first saw the Hill to the moment at which they all arrived at the back of the Stable , it took them over two hours .
It 's the sort of thing one could n't describe properly unless one wrote pages and pages about it .
The journey from each bit of cover to the next was a separate adventure , and there were very long waits in between , and several false alarms .
If you are a good Scout or a good Guide , you will know already what it must have been like .
By about sunset they were all safe in a clump of holly trees about fifteen yards behind the stable .
They all munched some biscuit and lay down .
Then came the worst part , the waiting .
Luckily for the children they slept for a couple of hours , but of course they woke up when the night grew cold , and what 's worse , woke up very thirsty and with no chance of getting a drink .
Puzzle just stood , shivering a little with nervousness , and said nothing .
But Tirian , with his head against Jewel 's flank , slept as sound as if he were in his royal bed at Cair Paravel , till the sound of a gong beating awoke him and he sat up and saw that there was firelight on the far side of the stable and knew that the hour had come .
" Kiss me , Jewel , " he said .
" For certainly this is our last night on earth .
And if ever I offended against you in any matter great or small , forgive me now . "
" Dear King , " said the Unicorn , " I could almost wish you had , so that I might forgive it .
Farewell .
We have known great joys together .
If Aslan gave me my choice I would choose no other life than the life I have had and no other death than the one we go to . "
Then they woke up Farsight who was asleep with his head under his wing ( it made him look as if he had no head at all ) and crept forward to the stable .
They left Puzzle ( not without a kind word , for no one was angry with him now ) just behind it , telling him not to move till someone came to fetch him , and took up their position at one end of the stable .
The bonfire had not been lit for long and was just beginning to blaze up .
It was only a few feet away from them , and the great crowd of Narnian creatures were on the other side of it , so that Tirian could not at first see them very well , though of course he saw dozens of eyes shining with the reflection of the fire , as you 've seen a rabbit 's or cat 's eyes in the headlights of a car .
And just as Tirian took his place , the gong stopped beating and from somewhere on his left three figures appeared .
One was Rishda Tarkaan , the Calormene Captain .
The second was the Ape .
He was holding onto the Tarkaan 's hand with one paw and kept whimpering and muttering , " Not so fast , do n't go so fast , I 'm not at _all_ well .
Oh my poor head !
These midnight meetings are getting too much for me .
Apes are n't meant to be up at night : It 's not as if I was a rat or a bat -- oh my poor head . "
On the other side of the Ape , walking very soft and stately , with his tail straight up in the air , came Ginger the Cat .
They were heading for the bonfire and were so close to Tirian that they would have seen him at once if they had looked in the right direction .
Fortunately they did not .
But Tirian heard Rishda say to Ginger in a low voice :
" Now Cat , to thy post .
See thou play thy part well . "
" Miaow , miaow .
Count on me ! " said Ginger .
Then he stepped away beyond the bonfire and sat down in the front row of the assembled Beasts : in the audience , as you might say .
For really , as it happened , the whole thing was rather like a theatre .
The crowd of Narnians were like the people in the seats ; the little grassy place just in front of the stable , where the bonfire burned and the Ape and the Captain stood to talk to the crowd , was like the stage ; the stable itself was like the scenery at the back of the stagehand Tirian and his friends were like people peering round from behind the scenery .
It was a splendid position .
If any of them stepped forward into the full firelight , all eyes would be fixed on him at once : on the other hand , so long as they stood still in the shadow of the end wall of the stable , it was a hundred to one against their being noticed .
Rishda Tarkaan dragged the Ape up close to the fire .
The pair of them turned to face the crowd , and this of course meant that their backs were towards Tirian and his friends .
" Now , Monkey , " said Rishda Tarkaan in a low voice .
" Say the words that wiser heads have put into thy mouth .
And hold up thy head . "
As he spoke he gave the Ape a little prod or kick from behind with the point of his toe .
" Do leave me alone , " muttered Shift .
But he sat up straighter and began , in a louder voice ----
" Now listen , all of you .
A terrible thing has happened .
A wicked thing .
The wickedest thing that ever was done in Narnia .
And Aslan ---- "
" Tashlan , fool , " whispered Rishda Tarkaan .
" Tashlan I mean , of course , " said the Ape , " is very angry about it . "
There was a terrible silence while the Beasts waited to hear what new trouble was in store for them .
The little party by the end - wall of the stable also held their breath .
What on earth was coming now ?
" Yes , " said the Ape .
" At this very moment , when the Terrible One himself is among us -- there in the stable just behind me -- one wicked Beast has chosen to do what you 'd think no one would dare to do even if _He_ were a thousand miles away .
It has dressed itself up in a lionskin and is wandering about in these very woods pretending to be Aslan . "
Jill wondered for a moment if the Ape had gone mad .
Was he going to tell the whole truth ?
A roar of horror and rage went up from the Beasts .
" Grrr ! " came the growls , " Who is he ?
Where is he ?
Just let me get my teeth into him ! "
" It was seen last night , " screamed the Ape , " but it got away .
It 's a donkey !
A common , miserable Ass !
If any of you see that Ass ---- "
" Grrr ! " growled the Beasts .
" We will , we will .
He 'd better keep out of _our_ way . "
Jill looked at the King : his mouth was open and his face was full of horror .
And then she understood the devilish cunning of the enemies ' plan .
By mixing a little truth with it they had made their lie far stronger .
What was the good , now , of telling the Beasts that an ass had been dressed up as a lion to deceive them ?
The Ape would only say , " That 's just what I 've said . "
What was the good of showing them Puzzle in his lionskin ?
They would only tear him in pieces .
" That 's taken the wind out of our sails , " whispered Eustace .
" The ground is taken from under our feet , " said Tirian .
" Curst , curst cleverness ! " said Poggin .
" I 'll be sworn that this new lie is of Ginger 's making . "