When Shasta went through the gate he found a slope of grass and a little heather running up before him to some trees .
He had nothing to think about now and no plans to make : he had only to run , and that was quite enough .
His limbs were shaking , a terrible stitch was beginning in his side , and the sweat that kept dropping into his eyes blinded them and made them smart .
He was unsteady on his feet too , and more than once he nearly turned his ankle on a loose stone .
The trees were thicker now than they had yet been and in the more open spaces there was bracken .
The sun had gone in without making it any cooler .
It had become one of those hot , grey days when there seem to be twice as many flies as usual .
Shasta 's face was covered with them ; he did n't even try to shake them off -- he had too much else to do .
Suddenly he heard a horn -- not a great throbbing horn like the horns of Tashbaan but a merry call , Ti - ro - to - to - ho !
Next moment he came out into a wide glade and found himself in a crowd of people .
At least , it looked a crowd to him .
In reality there were about fifteen or twenty of them , all gentlemen in green hunting dress , with their horses ; some in the saddle and some standing by their horses ' heads .
In the centre someone was holding the stirrup for a man to mount .
And the man he was holding it for was the jolliest , fat , apple - cheeked , twinkling - eyed King you could imagine .
As soon as Shasta came in sight this King forgot all about mounting his horse .
He spread out his arms to Shasta , his face lit up , and he cried out in a great , deep voice that seemed to come from the bottom of his chest .
" Corin !
My son !
And on foot , and in rags !
What ---- "
" No , " panted Shasta , shaking his head .
" Not Prince Corin .
I -- I -- know I 'm like him ... saw his Highness in Tashbaan ... sent his greetings . "
The King was staring at Shasta with an extraordinary expression on his face .
" Are you K - King Lune ? " gasped Shasta .
And then , without waiting for an answer , " Lord King -- fly -- Anvard -- shut the gates -- enemies upon you -- Rabadash and two hundred horse . "
" Have you assurance of this , boy ? " asked one of the other gentlemen .
" My own eyes , " said Shasta .
" I 've seen them .
Raced them all the way from Tashbaan . "
" On foot ? " said the gentleman , raising his eyebrows a little .
" Horses -- with the Hermit , " said Shasta .
" Question him no more , Darrin , " said King Lune .
" I see truth in his face .
We must ride for it , gentlemen .
A spare horse there , for the boy .
You can ride fast , friend ? "
For answer Shasta put his foot in the stirrup of the horse which had been led towards him and a moment later he was in the saddle .
He had done it a hundred times with Bree in the last few weeks , and his mounting was very different now from what it had been on that first night when Bree had said that he climbed up a horse as if he were climbing a haystack .
He was pleased to hear the Lord Darrin say to the King , " The boy has a true horseman 's seat , Sire .
I 'll warrant there 's noble blood in him . "
" His blood , aye , there 's the point , " said the King .
And he stared hard at Shasta again with that curious expression , almost a hungry expression , in his steady , grey eyes .
But by now the whole party was moving off at a brisk canter .
Shasta 's seat was excellent but he was sadly puzzled what to do with his reins , for he had never touched the reins while he was on Bree 's back .
But he looked very carefully out of the corners of his eyes to see what the others were doing ( as some of us have done at parties when we were n't quite sure which knife or fork we were meant to use ) and tried to get his fingers right .
But he did n't dare to try really directing the horse ; he trusted it would follow the rest .
The horse was of course an ordinary horse , not a Talking Horse ; but it had quite wits enough to realise that the strange boy on its back had no whip and no spurs and was not really master of the situation .
That was why Shasta soon found himself at the tail end of the procession .
Even so , he was going pretty fast .
There were no flies now and the air in his face was delicious .
He had got his breath back too .
And his errand had succeeded .
For the first time since the arrival at Tashbaan ( how long ago it seemed ! ) he was beginning to enjoy himself .
He looked up to see how much nearer the mountain tops had come .
To his disappointment he could not see them at all : only a vague greyness , rolling down towards them .
He had never been in mountain country before and was surprised .
" It 's a cloud , " he said to himself , " a cloud coming down .
I see .
Up here in the hills one is really in the sky .
I shall see what the inside of a cloud is like .
What fun !
I 've often wondered . "
Far away on his left , and a little behind him , the sun was getting ready to set .
They had come to a rough kind of road by now and were making very good speed .
But Shasta 's horse was still the last of the lot .
Once or twice when the road made a bend ( there was now continuous forest on each side of it ) he lost sight of the others for a second or two .
Then they plunged into the fog , or else the fog rolled over them .
The world became grey .
Shasta had not realised how cold and wet the inside of a cloud would be ; nor how dark .
The grey turned to black with alarming speed .
Someone at the head of the column winded the horn every now and then , and each time the sound came from a little further off .
He could n't see any of the others now , but of course he 'd be able to as soon as he got round the next bend .
But when he rounded it he still could n't see them .
In fact he could see nothing at all .
His horse was walking now .
" Get on , Horse , get on , " said Shasta .
Then came the horn , very faint .
Bree had always told him that he must keep his heels well turned out , and Shasta had got the idea that something very terrible would happen if he dug his heels into a horse 's sides .
This seemed to him an occasion for trying it .
" Look here , Horse , " he said , " if you do n't buck up , do you know what I 'll do ?
I 'll dig my heels into you .
I really will . "
The horse , however , took no notice of this threat .
So Shasta settled himself firmly in the saddle , gripped with his knees , clenched his teeth , and punched both the horse 's sides with his heels as hard as he could .
The only result was that the horse broke into a kind of pretence of a trot for five or six paces and then subsided into a walk again .
And now it was quite dark and they seemed to have given up blowing that horn .
The only sound was a steady drip - drip from the branches of the trees .
" Well , I suppose even a walk will get us somewhere sometime , " said Shasta to himself .
" I only hope I sha n't run into Rabadash and his people . "
He went on for what seemed a long time , always at a walking pace .
He began to hate that horse , and he was also beginning to feel very hungry .
Presently he came to a place where the road divided into two .
He was just wondering which led to Anvard when he was startled by a noise from behind him .
It was the noise of trotting horses .
" Rabadash ! " thought Shasta .
He had no way of guessing which road Rabadash would take .
" But if I take one , " said Shasta to himself , " he _may_ take the other : and if I stay at the cross-roads I 'm sure to be caught . "
He dismounted and led his horse as quickly as he could along the right - hand road .
The sound of the cavalry grew rapidly nearer and in a minute or two Shasta realised that they were at the cross-roads .
He held his breath , waiting to see which way they would take .
There came a low word of command " Halt ! " then a moment of horsey noises -- nostrils blowing , hoofs pawing , bits being champed , necks being patted .
Then a voice spoke .
" Attend , all of you , " it said .
" We are now within a furlong of the castle .
Remember your orders .
Once we are in Narnia , as we should be by sunrise , you are to kill as little as possible .
On this venture you are to regard every drop of Narnian blood as more precious than a gallon of your own .
On _this_ venture , I say .
The gods will send us a happier hour and then you must leave nothing alive between Cair Paravel and the Western Waste .
But we are not yet in Narnia .
Here in Archenland it is another thing .
In the assault on this castle of King Lune 's , nothing matters but speed .
Show your mettle .
It must be mine within an hour .
And if it is , I give it all to you .
I reserve no booty for myself .
Kill me every barbarian male within its walls , down to the child that was born yesterday , and everything else is yours to divide as you please -- the women , the gold , the jewels , the weapons , and the wine .
The man that I see hanging back when we come to the gates shall be burned alive .
In the name of Tash the irresistible , the inexorable -- forward ! "
With a great cloppitty - clop the column began to move , and Shasta breathed again .
They had taken the other road .
Shasta thought they took a long time going past , for though he had been talking and thinking about " two hundred horse " all day , he had not realised how many they really were .
But at last the sound died away and once more he was alone amid the drip - drip from the trees .
He now knew the way to Anvard but of course he could not now go there : that would only mean running into the arms of Rabadash 's troopers .
" What on earth am I to do ? " said Shasta to himself .
But he remounted his horse and continued along the road he had chosen , in the faint hope of finding some cottage where he might ask for shelter and a meal .
He had thought , of course , of going back to Aravis and Bree and Hwin at the hermitage , but he could n't because by now he had not the least idea of the direction .
" After all , " said Shasta , " this road is bound to get to somewhere . "
But that all depends on what you mean by somewhere .
The road kept on getting to somewhere in the sense that it got to more and more trees , all dark and dripping and to colder and colder air .
And strange , icy winds kept blowing the mist past him though they never blew it away .
If he had been used to mountain country he would have realised that this meant he was now very high up -- perhaps right at the top of the pass .
But Shasta knew nothing about mountains .
" I _do_ think , " said Shasta , " that I must be the most unfortunate boy that ever lived in the whole world .
Everything goes right for everyone except me .
Those Narnian lords and ladies got safe away from Tashbaan ; I was left behind .
Aravis and Bree and Hwin are all as snug as anything with that old Hermit : of course I was the one who was sent on .
King Lune and his people must have got safely into the castle and shut the gates long before Rabadash arrived , but I get left out . "
And being very tired and having nothing inside him , he felt so sorry for himself that the tears rolled down his cheeks .
What put a stop to all this was a sudden fright .
Shasta discovered that someone or somebody was walking beside him .
It was pitch dark and he could see nothing .
And the Thing ( or Person ) was going so quietly that he could hardly hear any footfalls .
What he could hear was breathing .
His invisible companion seemed to breathe on a very large scale , and Shasta got the impression that it was a very large creature .
And he had come to notice this breathing so gradually that he had really no idea how long it had been there .
It was a horrible shock .
It darted into his mind that he had heard long ago that there were giants in these Northern countries .
He bit his lip in terror .
But now that he really had something to cry about , he stopped crying .
The Thing ( unless it was a Person ) went on beside him so very quietly that Shasta began to hope he had only imagined it .
But just as he was becoming quite sure of it , there suddenly came a deep , rich sigh out of the darkness beside him .
That could n't be imagination !
Anyway , he had felt the hot breath of that sigh on his chilly left hand .
If the horse had been any good -- or if he had known how to get any good out of the horse -- he would have risked everything on a break away and a wild gallop .
But he knew he could n't make that horse gallop .
So he went on at a walking pace and the unseen companion walked and breathed beside him .
At last he could bear it no longer .
" Who are you ? " he said , scarcely above a whisper .
" One who has waited long for you to speak , " said the Thing .
Its voice was not loud , but very large and deep .
" Are you -- are you a giant ? " asked Shasta .
" You might call me a giant , " said the Large Voice .
" But I am not like the creatures you call giants . "
" I ca n't see you at all , " said Shasta , after staring very hard .
Then ( for an even more terrible idea had come into his head ) he said , almost in a scream , " You 're not -- not something _dead_ , are you ?
Oh please -- please do go away .
What harm have I ever done you ?
Oh , I am the unluckiest person in the whole world ? "
Once more he felt the warm breath of the Thing on his hand and face .
" There , " it said , " that is not the breath of a ghost .
Tell me your sorrows . "
Shasta was a little reassured by the breath : so he told how he had never known his real father or mother and had been brought up sternly by the fisherman .
And then he told the story of his escape and how they were chased by lions and forced to swim for their lives ; and of all their dangers in Tashbaan and about his night among the Tombs and how the beasts howled at him out of the desert .
And he told about the heat and thirst of their desert journey and how they were almost at their goal when another lion chased them and wounded Aravis .
And also , how very long it was since he had had anything to eat .
" I do not call you unfortunate , " said the Large Voice .
" Do n't you think it was bad luck to meet so many lions ? " said Shasta .
" There was only one lion , " said the Voice .
" What on earth do you mean ?
I 've just told you there were at least two the first night , and ---- "
" There was only one : but he was swift of foot . "
" How do you know ? "
" I was the lion . "
And as Shasta gaped with open mouth and said nothing , the Voice continued .
" I was the lion who forced you to join with Aravis .
I was the cat who comforted you among the houses of the dead .
I was the lion who drove the jackals from you while you slept .
I was the lion who gave the Horses the new strength of fear for the last mile so that you should reach King Lune in time .
And I was the lion you do not remember who pushed the boat in which you lay , a child near death , so that it came to shore where a man sat , wakeful at midnight , to receive you . "
" Then it was you who wounded Aravis ? "
" It was I. "
" But what for ? "
" Child , " said the Voice , " I am telling you your story , not hers .
I tell no - one any story but his own . "
" Who are you ? " asked Shasta .
" Myself , " said the Voice , very deep and low so that the earth shook : and again " Myself , " loud and clear and gay : and then the third time " Myself , " whispered so softly you could hardly hear it , and yet it seemed to come from all round you as if the leaves rustled with it .
Shasta was no longer afraid that the Voice belonged to something that would eat him , nor that it was the voice of a ghost .
But a new and different sort of trembling came over him .
Yet he felt glad too .
The mist was turning from black to grey and from grey to white .
This must have begun to happen some time ago , but while he had been talking to the Thing he had not been noticing anything else .
Now , the whiteness around him became a shining whiteness ; his eyes began to blink .
Somewhere ahead he could hear birds singing .
He knew the night was over at last .
He could see the mane and ears and head of his horse quite easily now .
A golden light fell on them from the left .
He thought it was the sun .
He turned and saw , pacing beside him , taller than the horse , a Lion .
The horse did not seem to be afraid of it or else could not see it .
It was from the Lion that the light came .
No - one ever saw anything more terrible or beautiful .
Luckily Shasta had lived all his life too far south in Calormen to have heard the tales that were whispered in Tashbaan about a dreadful Narnian demon that appeared in the form of a lion .
And of course he knew none of the true stories about Aslan , the great Lion , the son of the Emperor - over-sea , the King above all High Kings in Narnia .
But after one glance at the Lion 's face he slipped out of the saddle and fell at its feet .
He could n't say anything but then he did n't want to say anything , and he knew he need n't say anything .
The High King above all kings stooped towards him .
Its mane , and some strange and solemn perfume that hung about the mane , was all round him .
It touched his forehead with its tongue .
He lifted his face and their eyes met .
Then instantly the pale brightness of the mist and the fiery brightness of the Lion rolled themselves together into a swirling glory and gathered themselves up and disappeared .
He was alone with the horse on a grassy hillside under a blue sky .
And there were birds singing .