The Lion was pacing to and fro about that empty land and singing his new song .
It was softer and more lilting than the song by which he had called up the stars and the sun ; a gentle , rippling music .
And as he walked and sang the valley grew green with grass .
It spread out from the Lion like a pool .
It ran up the sides of the little hills like a wave .
In a few minutes it was creeping up the lower slopes of the distant mountains , making that young world every moment softer .
The light wind could now be heard ruffling the grass .
Soon there were other things besides grass .
The higher slopes grew dark with heather .
Patches of rougher and more bristling green appeared in the valley .
Digory did not know what they were until one began coming up quite close to him .
It was a little , spiky thing that grew out dozens of arms and covered these arms with green and grew larger at the rate of about an inch every two seconds .
There were dozens of these things all round him now .
When they were nearly as tall as himself he saw what they were .
" Trees ! " he exclaimed .
The nuisance of it , as Polly said afterwards , was that you were n't left in peace to watch it all .
Just as Digory said " Trees ! " he had to jump because Uncle Andrew had sidled up to him again and was just going to pick his pocket .
It would n't have done Uncle Andrew much good if he had succeeded , for he was aiming at the right - hand pocket because he still thought the green Rings were " homeward " Rings .
But of course Digory did n't want to lose either .
" Stop ! " cried the Witch .
" Stand back .
No , further back .
If anyone goes within ten paces of either of the children , I will knock out his brains . "
She was poising in her hand the iron bar that she had torn off the lamp - post , ready to throw it .
Somehow no one doubted that she would be a very good shot .
" So ! " she said .
" You would steal back to your own world with the boy and leave me here . "
Uncle Andrew 's temper at last got the better of his fears .
" Yes , Ma'am , I would , " he said .
" Most undoubtedly I would .
I should be perfectly in my rights .
I have been most shamefully , most abominably treated .
I have done my best to show you such civilities as were in my power .
And what has been my reward ?
You have robbed -- I must repeat the word -- _robbed_ a highly respectable jeweller .
You have insisted on my entertaining you to an exceedingly expensive , not to say , ostentatious lunch , though I was obliged to pawn my watch and chain in order to do so ( and let me tell you , Ma'am , that none of our family have been in the habit of frequenting pawnshops , except my cousin Edward , and he was in the Yeomanry ) .
During that indigestible meal -- I 'm feeling the worse for it at this very moment -- your behaviour and conversation attracted the unfavourable attention of everyone present .
I feel I have been publicly disgraced .
I shall never be able to show my face in the Trocadero again .
You have assaulted the police .
You have stolen ---- "
" Oh stow it , Guv'nor , do stow it , " said the Cabby .
" Watchin ' and listenin ' ' s the thing at present ; not talking . "
There was certainly plenty to watch and to listen to .
The tree which Digory had noticed first was now a full - grown beech whose branches swayed gently above his head .
They stood on cool , green grass , sprinkled with daisies and buttercups .
A little way off , along the river bank , willows were growing .
On the other side tangles of flowering currant , lilac , wild rose , and rhododendron closed them in .
The horse was tearing up delicious mouthfuls of new grass .
All this time the Lion 's song , and his stately prowl , to and fro , backwards and forwards , was going on .
What was rather alarming was that at each turn he came a little nearer .
Polly was finding the song more and more interesting because she thought she was beginning to see the connection between the music and the things that were happening .
When a line of dark firs sprang up on a ridge about a hundred yards away she felt that they were connected with a series of deep , prolonged notes which the Lion had sung a second before .
And when he burst into a rapid series of lighter notes she was not surprised to see primroses suddenly appearing in every direction .
Thus , with an unspeakable thrill , she felt quite certain that all the things were coming ( as she said ) " out of the Lion 's head . "
When you listened to his song you heard the things he was making up : when you looked round you , you saw them .
This was so exciting that she had no time to be afraid .
But Digory and the Cabby could not help feeling a bit nervous as each turn of the Lion 's walk brought him nearer .
As for Uncle Andrew , his teeth were chattering , but his knees were shaking so that he could not run away .
Suddenly the Witch stepped boldly out towards the Lion .
It was coming on , always singing , with a slow , heavy pace .
It was only twelve yards away .
She raised her arm and flung the iron bar straight at its head .
Nobody , least of all Jadis , could have missed at that range .
The bar struck the Lion fair between the eyes .
It glanced off and fell with a thud in the grass .
The Lion came on .
Its walk was neither slower nor faster than before ; you could not tell whether it even knew it had been hit .
Though its soft pads made no noise , you could feel the earth shake beneath their weight .
The Witch shrieked and ran : in a few moments she was out of sight among the trees .
Uncle Andrew turned to do likewise , tripped over a root , and fell flat on his face in a little brook that ran down to join the river .
The children could not move .
They were not even quite sure that they wanted to .
The Lion paid no attention to them .
Its huge red mouth was open , but open in song not in a snarl .
It passed by them so close that they could have touched its mane .
They were terribly afraid it would turn and look at them , yet in some queer way they wished it would .
But for all the notice it took of them they might just as well have been invisible and unsmellable .
When it had passed them and gone a few paces further it turned , passed them again , and continued its march eastward .
Uncle Andrew , coughing and spluttering , picked himself up .
" Now , Digory , " he said , " we 've got rid of that Woman , and the brute of a lion is gone .
Give me your hand and put on your Ring at once . "
" Keep off , " said Digory , backing away from him .
" Keep clear of him , Polly .
Come over here beside me .
Now I warn you , Uncle Andrew , do n't come one step nearer , we 'll just vanish . "
" Do what you 're told this minute , sir , " said Uncle Andrew .
" You 're an extremely disobedient , ill - behaved little boy . "
" No fear , " said Digory .
" We want to stay and see what happens .
I thought you wanted to know about other worlds .
Do n't you like it now you 're here ? "
" Like it ! " exclaimed Uncle Andrew .
" Just look at the state I 'm in .
And it was my best coat and waistcoat , too . "
He certainly was a dreadful sight by now : for of course , the more dressed up you were to begin with , the worse you look after you 've crawled out of a smashed hansom - cab and fallen into a muddy brook .
" I 'm not saying , " he added , " that this is not a most interesting place .
If I were a younger man , now ---- perhaps I could get some lively young fellow to come here first .
One of those big - game hunters .
Something might be made of this country .
The climate is delightful .
I never felt such air .
I believe it would have done me good if -- if circumstances had been more favourable .
If only we 'd had a gun . "
" Guns be blowed , " said the Cabby .
" I think I 'll go and see if I can give Strawberry a rub down .
That horse ' as more sense than some ' umans as I could mention . "
He walked back to Strawberry and began making the hissing noises that grooms make .
" Do you still think _that_ Lion could be killed by a gun ? " asked Digory .
" He did n't mind the iron bar much . "
" With all her faults , " said Uncle Andrew , " that 's a plucky gel , my boy .
It was a spirited thing to do . "
He rubbed his hands and cracked his knuckles , as if he were once more forgetting how the Witch frightened him whenever she was really there .
" It was a wicked thing to do , " said Polly .
" What harm had He done her ? "
" Hullo !
What 's that ? " said Digory .
He had darted forward to examine something only a few yards away .
" I say , Polly , " he called back .
" Do come and look . "
Uncle Andrew came with her ; not because he wanted to see but because he wanted to keep close to the children -- there might be a chance of stealing their Rings .
But when he saw what Digory was looking at , even he began to take an interest .
It was a perfect little model of a lamp - post , about three feet high but lengthening , and thickening in proportion , as they watched it ; in fact growing just as the trees had grown .
" It 's alive too -- I mean , it 's lit , " said Digory .
And so it was ; though , of course , the brightness of the sun made the little flame in the lantern hard to see unless your shadow fell on it .
" Remarkable , most remarkable , " muttered Uncle Andrew .
" Even I never dreamt of Magic like this .
We 're in a world where everything , even a lamp - post , comes to life and grows .
Now I wonder what sort of seed a lamp - post grows from ? "
" Do n't you see ? " said Digory .
" This is where the bar fell -- the bar she tore off the lamp - post at home .
It sank into the ground and now it 's coming up as a young lamp - post . "
( But not so very young now ; it was as tall as Digory while he said this . )
" That 's it !
Stupendous , stupendous , " said Uncle Andrew , rubbing his hands harder than ever .
" Ho , ho !
They laughed at my Magic .
That fool of a sister of mine thinks I 'm a lunatic .
I wonder what they 'll say now ?
I have discovered a world where everything is bursting with life and growth .
Columbus , now , they talk about Columbus .
But what was America to this ?
The commercial possibilities of this country are unbounded .
Bring a few old bits of scrap iron here , bury 'em , and up they come as brand new railway engines , battleships , anything you please .
They 'll cost nothing , and I can sell 'em at full prices in England .
I shall be a millionaire .
And then the climate !
I feel twenty years younger already .
I can run it as a health resort .
A good sanatorium here might be worth twenty thousand a year .
Of course I shall have to let a few people into the secret .
The first thing is to get that brute shot . "
" You 're just like the Witch , " said Polly .
" All you think of is killing things . "
" And then as regards oneself , " Uncle Andrew continued , in a happy dream .
" There 's no knowing how long I might live if I settled here .
And that 's a big consideration when a fellow has turned sixty .
I should n't be surprised if I never grew a day older in this country !
Stupendous !
The land of youth ! "
" Oh ! " cried Digory .
" The land of youth !
Do you think it really is ? "
For of course he remembered what Aunt Letty had said to the lady who brought the grapes , and that sweet hope rushed back upon him .
" Uncle Andrew , " he said , " do you think there 's anything here that would cure Mother ? "
" What are you talking about ? " said Uncle Andrew .
" This is n't a chemist 's shop .
But as I was saying ---- "
" You do n't care twopence about her , " said Digory savagely .
" I thought you might ; after all , she 's your sister as well as my Mother .
Well , no matter .
I 'm jolly well going to ask the Lion himself if he can help me . "
And he turned and walked briskly away .
Polly waited for a moment and then went after him .
" Here !
Stop !
Come back !
The boy 's gone mad , " said Uncle Andrew .
He followed the children at a cautious distance behind ; for he did n't want to get too far away from the green Rings or too near the Lion .
In a few minutes Digory came to the edge of the wood and there he stopped .
The Lion was singing still .
But now the song had once more changed .
It was more like what we should call a tune , but it was also far wilder .
It made you want to run and jump and climb .
It made you want to shout .
It made you want to rush at other people and either hug them or fight them .
It made Digory hot and red in the face .
It had some effect even on Uncle Andrew , for Digory could hear him saying , " A spirited gel , sir .
It 's a pity about her temper , but a dem fine woman all the same , a dem fine woman . "
But what the song did to the two humans was nothing compared with what it was doing to the country .
Can you imagine a stretch of grassy land bubbling like water in a pot ?
For that is really the best description of what was happening .
In all directions it was swelling into humps .
They were of very different sizes , some no bigger than mole - hills , some as big as wheelbarrows , two the size of cottages .
And the humps moved and swelled till they burst , and the crumbled earth poured out of them , and from each hump there came out an animal .
The moles came out just as you might see a mole come out in England .
The dogs came out , barking the moment their heads were free , and struggling as you 've seen them do when they are getting through a narrow hole in a hedge .
The stags were the queerest to watch , for of course the antlers came up a long time before the rest of them , so at first Digory thought they were trees .
The frogs , who all came up near the river , went straight into it with a plop - plop and a loud croaking .
The panthers , leopards and things of that sort , sat down at once to wash the loose earth off their hind quarters and then stood up against the trees to sharpen their front claws .
Showers of birds came out of the trees .
Butterflies fluttered .
Bees got to work on the flowers as if they had n't a second to lose .
But the greatest moment of all was when the biggest hump broke like a small earthquake and out came the sloping back , the large , wise head , and the four baggy - trousered legs of an Elephant .
And now you could hardly hear the song of the Lion ; there was so much cawing , cooing , crowing , braying , neighing , baying , barking , lowing , bleating , and trumpeting .
But though Digory could no longer hear the Lion , he could see it .
It was so big and so bright that he could not take his eyes off it .
The other animals did not appear to be afraid of it .
Indeed , at that very moment , Digory heard the sound of hoofs from behind ; a second later the old cab - horse trotted past him and joined the other beasts .
( The air had apparently suited him as well as it had suited Uncle Andrew .
He no longer looked like the poor , old slave he had been in London ; he was picking up his feet and holding his head erect . )
And now , for the first time , the Lion was quite silent .
He was going to and fro among the animals .
And every now and then he would go up to two of them ( always two at a time ) and touch their noses with his .
He would touch two beavers among all the beavers , two leopards among all the leopards , one stag and one deer among all the deer , and leave the rest .
Some sorts of animal he passed over altogether .
But the pairs which he had touched instantly left their own kinds and followed him .
At last he stood still and all the creatures whom he had touched came and stood in a wide circle around him .
The others whom he had not touched began to wander away .
Their noises faded gradually into the distance .
The chosen beasts who remained were now utterly silent , all with their eyes fixed intently upon the Lion .
The cat - like ones gave an occasional twitch of the tail but otherwise all were still .
For the first time that day there was complete silence , except for the noise of running water .
Digory 's heart beat wildly ; he knew something very solemn was going to be done .
He had not forgotten about his Mother ; but he knew jolly well that , even for her , he could n't interrupt a thing like this .
The Lion , whose eyes never blinked , stared at the animals as hard as if he was going to burn them up with his mere stare .
And gradually a change came over them .
The smaller ones -- the rabbits , moles and such - like -- grew a good deal larger .
The very big ones -- you noticed it most with the elephants -- grew a little smaller .
Many animals sat up on their hind legs .
Most put their heads on one side as if they were trying very hard to understand .
The Lion opened his mouth , but no sound came from it ; he was breathing out , a long , warm breath ; it seemed to sway all the beasts as the wind sways a line of trees .
Far overhead from beyond the veil of blue sky which hid them the stars sang again : a pure , cold , difficult music .
Then there came a swift flash like fire ( but it burnt nobody ) either from the sky or from the Lion itself , and every drop of blood tingled in the children 's bodies , and the deepest , wildest voice they had ever heard was saying :
" Narnia , Narnia , Narnia , awake .
Love .
Think .
Speak .
Be walking trees .
Be talking beasts .
Be divine waters . "