Edmund meanwhile had been having a most disappointing time .
When the Dwarf had gone to get the sledge ready he expected that the Witch would start being nice to him , as she had been at their last meeting .
But she said nothing at all .
And when at last Edmund plucked up his courage to say , " Please , your Majesty , could I have some Turkish Delight ?
You -- you -- said -- " she answered , " Silence , fool ! "
Then she appeared to change her mind and said , as if to herself , " And yet it will not do to have the brat fainting on the way , " and once more clapped her hands .
Another dwarf appeared .
" Bring the human creature food and drink , " she said .
The Dwarf went away and presently returned bringing an iron bowl with some water in it and an iron plate with a hunk of dry bread on it .
He grinned in a repulsive manner as he set them down the floor beside Edmund and said :
" Turkish Delight for the little Prince .
Ha !
Ha !
Ha ! "
" Take it away , " said Edmund sulkily .
" I do n't want dry bread . "
But the Witch suddenly turned on him with such a terrible expression on her face that he apologised and began to nibble at the bread , though it was so stale he could hardly get it down .
" You may be glad enough of it before you taste bread again , " said the Witch .
While he was still chewing away the first dwarf came back and announced that the sledge was ready .
The White Witch rose and went out , ordering Edmund to go with her .
The snow was again falling as they came into the courtyard but she took no notice of that and made Edmund sit beside her on the sledge .
But before they drove off she called Fenris Ulf and he came bounding like an enormous dog to the side of the sledge .
" Take with you the swiftest of your wolves and go at once to the house of the Beavers , " said the Witch , " and kill whatever you find there .
If they are already gone , then make all speed to the Stone Table , but do not be seen .
Wait for me there in hiding .
I meanwhile must go many miles to the West before I find a place where I can drive across the river .
You may overtake these humans before they reach the Stone Table .
You will know what to do if you find them ! "
" I hear and obey , O Queen , " growled the Wolf ; and immediately he shot away into the snow and darkness , as quickly as a horse can gallop .
In a few minutes he had called another wolf and was with him down on the dam and sniffing at the Beavers ' house .
But of course they found it empty .
It would have been a dreadful thing for the Beavers and the children if the night had remained fine , for the wolves would then have been able to follow their trail -- and ten to one would have overtaken them before they had got to the cave .
But now that the snow had begun again the scent was cold and even the footprints were covered up .
Meanwhile the Dwarf whipped up the reindeer and the Witch and Edmund drove out under the archway and on and away into the darkness and the cold .
This was a terrible journey for Edmund who had no coat .
Before they had been going a quarter of an hour all the front of him was covered with snow -- he soon stopped trying to shake it off because , as quickly as he did that , a new lot gathered , and he was so tired .
Soon he was wet to the skin .
And oh , how miserable he was .
It did n't look now as if the Witch intended to make him a King !
All the things he had said to make himself believe that she was good and kind and that her side was really the right side sounded to him silly now .
He would have given anything to meet the others at this moment -- even Peter !
The only way to comfort himself now was to try to believe that the whole thing was a dream and that he might wake up at any moment .
And as they went on , hour after hour , it did come to seem like a dream .
This lasted longer than I could describe even if I wrote pages and pages about it .
But I will skip on to the time when the snow had stopped and the morning had come and they were racing along in the daylight .
And still they went on and on , with no sound but the everlasting swish of the snow and the creaking of the reindeer 's harness .
And then at last the Witch said , " What have we here ?
Stop ! " and they did .
How Edmund hoped she was going to say something about breakfast !
But she had stopped for quite a different reason .
A little way off at the foot of a tree sat a merry party , a squirrel and his wife with their children and two satyrs and a dwarf and an old dog - fox , all on stools round a table .
Edmund could n't quite see what they were eating , but it smelled lovely and there seemed to be decorations of holly and he was n't at all sure that he did n't see something like a plum pudding .
At the moment when the sledge stopped , the Fox , who was obviously the oldest person present , had just risen to its feet , holding a glass in its right paw as if it was going to say something .
But when the whole party saw the sledge stopping and who was in it , all the gaiety went out of their faces .
The father squirrel stopped eating with his fork half - way to his mouth and one of the satyrs stopped with its fork actually in its mouth , and the baby squirrels squealed with terror .
" What is the meaning of this ? " asked the Witch Queen .
Nobody answered .
" Speak , vermin ! " she said again .
" Or do you want my dwarf to find you a tongue with his whip ?
What is the meaning of all this gluttony , this waste , this self indulgence ?
Where did you get all these things ? "
" Please , your Majesty , " said the Fox , " we were given them .
And if I might make so bold as to drink your Majesty 's very good health -- "
" Who gave them to you ? " said the Witch .
" F-F-F - Father Christmas , " stammered the Fox .
" What ? " roared the Witch , springing from the sledge and taking a few strides nearer to the terrified animals .
" He has not been here !
He can not have been here !
How dare you -- but no .
Say you have been lying and you shall even now be forgiven . "
At that moment one of the young squirrels lost its head completely .
" He has -- he has -- he has ! " it squeaked beating its little spoon on the table .
Edmund saw the Witch bite her lips so that a drop of blood appeared on her white cheek .
Then she raised her wand .
" Oh do n't , do n't , please do n't , " shouted Edmund , but even while he was shouting she had waved her wand and instantly where the merry party had been there were only statues of creatures ( one with its stone fork fixed forever half - way to its stone mouth ) seated round a stone table on which there were stone plates and a stone plum pudding .
" As for you , " said the Witch , giving Edmund a stunning blow on the face as she re-mounted the sledge , " let that teach you to ask favour for spies and traitors .
Drive on ! "
And Edmund for the first time in this story felt sorry for someone besides himself .
It seemed so pitiful to think of those little stone figures sitting there all the silent days and all the dark nights , year after year , till the moss grew on them and at last even their faces crumbled away .
Now they were steadily racing on again .
And soon Edmund noticed that the snow which splashed against them as they rushed through it was much wetter than it had been all last night .
At the same time he noticed that he was feeling much less cold .
It was also becoming foggy .
In fact every minute it grew both foggier and warmer .
And the sledge was not running nearly as well as it had been running up till now .
At first he thought this was because the reindeer were tired , but soon he saw that that could n't be the real reason .
The sledge jerked , and skidded , and kept on jolting as if it had struck against stones .
And however the Dwarf whipped the poor reindeer the sledge went slower and slower .
There also seemed to be a curious noise all round them but the noise of their driving and jolting and the Dwarf 's shouting at the reindeer prevented Edmund from hearing what it was , until suddenly the sledge stuck so fast that it would n't go on at all .
When that happened there was a moment 's silence .
And in that silence Edmund could at last listen to the other noise properly .
A strange , sweet , rustling , chattering noise -- and yet not so strange , for he knew he 'd heard it before -- if only he could remember where !
Then all at once he did remember .
It was the noise of running water .
All round them , though out of sight , there were streams chattering , murmuring , bubbling , splashing and even ( in the distance ) roaring .
And his heart gave a great leap ( though he hardly knew why ) when he realised that the frost was over .
And much nearer there was a drip - drip - drip from the branches of all the trees .
And then , as he looked at one tree he saw a great load of snow slide off it and for the first time since he had entered Narnia he saw the dark green of a fir tree .
But he had n't time to listen or watch any longer for the Witch said :
" Do n't sit staring , fool !
Get out and help . "
And of course Edmund had to obey .
He stepped out into the snow -- but it was really only slush by now -- and began helping the Dwarf to get the sledge out of the muddy hole it had got into .
They got it out in the end , and by being very cruel to the reindeer the Dwarf managed to get it on the move again , and they drove a little further .
And now the snow was really melting in earnest and patches of green grass were beginning to appear in every direction .
Unless you have looked at a world of snow as long as Edmund had been looking at it , you will hardly be able to imagine what a relief those green patches were after the endless white .
Then the sledge stopped again .
" It 's no good , your Majesty , " said the Dwarf .
" We ca n't sledge in this thaw . "
" Then we must walk , " said the Witch .
" We shall never overtake them walking , " growled the dwarf .
" Not with the start they 've got . "
" Are you my councillor or my slave ? " said the Witch .
" Do as you 're told .
Tie the hands of the human creature behind it and keep hold of the end of the rope .
And take your whip .
And cut the harness of the reindeer ; they 'll find their own way home . "
The Dwarf obeyed , and in a few minutes Edmund found himself being forced to walk as fast as he could with his hands tied behind him .
He kept on slipping in the slush and mud and wet grass , and every time he slipped the Dwarf gave him a curse and sometimes a flick with the whip .
The Witch walked behind the dwarf and kept on saying , " Faster !
Faster ! "
Every moment the patches of green grew bigger and the patches of snow grew smaller .
Every moment more and more of the trees shook off their robes of snow .
Soon , wherever you looked , instead of white shapes you saw the dark green of firs or the black prickly branches of bare oaks and beeches and elms .
Then the mist turned from white to gold and presently cleared away altogether .
Shafts of delicious sunlight struck down onto the forest floor and overhead you could see a blue sky between the tree - tops .
Soon there were more wonderful things happening .
Coming suddenly round a corner into a glade of silver birch trees Edmund saw the ground covered in all directions with little yellow flowers -- celandines .
The noise of water grew louder .
Presently they actually crossed a stream .
Beyond it they found snowdrops growing .
" Mind your own business ! " said the Dwarf when he saw that Edmund had turned his head to look at them ; and he gave the rope a vicious jerk .
But of course this did n't prevent Edmund from seeing .
Only five minutes later he noticed a dozen crocuses growing round the foot of an old tree -- gold and purple and white .
Then came a sound even more delicious than the sound of the water .
Close beside the path they were following a bird suddenly chirped from the branch of a tree .
It was answered by the chuckle of another bird a little further off .
And then , as if that had been a signal , there was chattering and chirruping in every direction , and then a moment of full song , and within five minutes the whole wood was ringing with birds ' music , and wherever Edmund 's eyes turned he saw birds alighting on branches , or sailing overhead or having their little quarrels .
" Faster !
Faster ! " said the Witch .
There was no trace of the fog now .
The sky became bluer and bluer and now there were white clouds hurrying across it from time to time .
In the wide glades there were primroses .
A light breeze sprang up which scattered drops of moisture from the swaying branches and carried cool , delicious scents against the faces of the travellers .
The trees began to come fully alive .
The larches and birches were covered with green , the laburnums with gold .
Soon the beech trees had put forth their delicate , transparent leaves .
As the travellers walked under them the light also became green .
A bee buzzed across their path .
" This is no thaw , " said the Dwarf , suddenly stopping .
" This is _spring_ .
What are we to do ?
Your winter has been destroyed , I tell you !
This is Aslan 's doing . "
" If either of you mention that name again , " said the Witch , " he shall instantly be killed . "