" I wish the Macready would hurry up and take all these people away , " said Susan presently , " I 'm getting horribly cramped . "
" And what a filthy smell of camphor ! " said Edmund .
" I expect the pockets of these coats are full of it , " said Susan , " to keep away moths . "
" There 's something sticking into my back , " said Peter .
" And is n't it cold ? " said Susan .
" Now that you mention it , it is cold , " said Peter , " and hang it all , it 's wet too .
What 's the matter with this place ?
I 'm sitting on something wet .
It 's getting wetter every minute . "
He struggled to his feet .
" Let 's get out , " said Edmund , " they 've gone . "
" O-o - oh ! " said Susan suddenly .
And everyone asked her what was the matter .
" I 'm sitting against a tree , " said Susan , " and look !
It 's getting lighter -- over there . "
" By jove , you 're right , " said Peter , " and look there -- and there .
It 's trees all round .
And this wet stuff is snow .
Why , I do believe we 've got into Lucy 's wood after all . "
And now there was no mistaking it and all four children stood blinking in the daylight of a winter day .
Behind them were coats hanging on pegs , in front of them were snow - covered trees .
Peter turned at once to Lucy .
" I apologise for not believing you , " he said , " I 'm sorry .
Will you shake hands ? "
" Of course , " said Lucy , and did .
" And now , " said Susan , " what do we do next ? "
" Do ? " said Peter , " why , go and explore the wood , of course . "
" Ugh ! " said Susan , stamping her feet , " it 's pretty cold .
What about putting on some of these coats ? "
" They 're not ours , " said Peter doubtfully .
" I am sure nobody would mind , " said Susan .
" It is n't as if we wanted to take them out of the house ; we sha n't take them even out of the wardrobe . "
" I never thought of that , Su , " said Peter .
" Of course , now you put it that way , I see .
No one could say you had bagged a coat as long as you leave it in the wardrobe where you found it .
And I suppose this whole country is in the wardrobe . "
They immediately carried out Susan 's very sensible plan .
The coats were rather too big for them so that they came down to their heels and looked more like royal robes than coats when they had put them on .
But they all felt a good deal warmer and each thought the others looked better in their new get - up and more suitable to the landscape .
" We can pretend we are Arctic explorers , " said Lucy .
" This is going to be exciting enough without any pretending , " said Peter , as he began leading the way forward into the forest .
There were heavy darkish clouds overhead and it looked as if there might be more snow before night .
" I say , " began Edmund presently , " ought n't we to be bearing a bit more to the left , that is , if we are aiming for the lamp - post . "
He had forgotten for the moment that he must pretend never to have been in the wood before .
The moment the words were out of his mouth he realised that he had given himself away .
Everyone stopped ; everyone stared at him .
Peter whistled .
" So you really were here , " he said , " that time Lu said she 'd met you in here -- and you made out she was telling lies . "
There was a dead silence .
" Well , of all the poisonous little beasts -- " said Peter and shrugged his shoulders and said no more .
There seemed , indeed , no more to say and presently the four resumed their journey ; but Edmund was saying to himself , " I 'll pay you all out for this , you pack of stuck - up , self-satisfied prigs . "
" Where _are_ we going anyway ? " said Susan , chiefly for the sake of changing the subject .
" I think Lu ought to be the leader , " said Peter , " goodness knows she deserves it .
Where will you take us , Lu ? "
" What about going to see Mr. Tumnus ? " said Lucy .
" He 's the nice Faun I told you about . "
Everyone agreed to this and off they went , walking briskly and stamping their feet .
Lucy proved a good leader .
At first she wondered whether she would be able to find the way , but she recognised an odd - looking tree in one place and a stump in another and brought them on to where the ground became uneven and into the little valley and at last to the very door of Mr. Tumnus ' cave .
But there a terrible surprise awaited them .
The door had been wrenched off its hinges and broken to bits .
Inside , the cave was dark and cold and had the damp feel and smell of a place that had not been lived in for several days .
Snow had drifted in from the doorway and was heaped on the floor , mixed with something black , which turned out to be the charred sticks and ashes from the fire .
Someone had apparently flung it about the room and then stamped it out .
The crockery lay smashed on the floor and the picture of the Faun 's father had been slashed into shreds with a knife .
" This is a pretty good wash - out , " said Edmund , " not much good coming here . "
" What 's this ? " said Peter , stooping down .
He had just noticed a piece of paper which had been nailed through the carpet to the floor .
" Is there anything written on it ? " asked Susan .
" Yes , I think there is , " answered Peter , " but I ca n't read it in this light .
Let 's get out into the open air . "
They all went out in the daylight and crowded round Peter as he read out the following words : --
" The former occupant of these premises , the Faun Tumnus , is under arrest and awaiting his trial on a charge of High Treason against her Imperial Majesty Jadis , Queen of Narnia , Chatelaine of Cair Paravel , Empress of the Lone Islands , etc. , also of comforting her said Majesty 's enemies , harbouring spies and fraternising with Humans .
_Signed_ FENRIS ULF , Captain of the Secret Police ,
LONG LIVE THE QUEEN !
"
The children stared at each other .
" I do n't know that I 'm going to like this place after all , " said Susan .
" Who is this Queen , Lu ? " said Peter .
" Do you know anything about her ? "
" She is n't a real queen at all , " answered Lucy , " she 's a horrible witch , the White Witch .
Everyone -- all the wood people -- hate her .
She has made an enchantment over the whole country so that it is always winter here and never Christmas . "
" I -- I wonder if there 's any point in going on , " said Susan .
" I mean , it does n't seem particularly safe here and it looks as if it wo n't be much fun either .
And it 's getting colder every minute , and we 've brought nothing to eat .
What about just going home ? "
" Oh , but we ca n't , we ca n't , " said Lucy suddenly .
" Do n't you see ?
We ca n't just go home , not after this .
It is all on my account that the poor Faun has got into this trouble .
He hid me from the Witch and showed me the way back .
That 's what it means by comforting the Queen 's enemies and fraternising with Humans .
We simply must try to rescue him . "
" A lot _we_ could do ! " said Edmund , " when we have n't even got anything to eat ! "
" Shut up -- you ! " said Peter , who was still very angry with Edmund .
" What do you think , Susan ? "
" I 've a horrid feeling that Lu is right , " said Susan .
" I do n't want to go a step further and I wish we 'd never come .
But I think we must try to do something for Mr. Whatever - his - name is -- I mean the Faun . "
" That 's what I feel too , " said Peter .
" I 'm worried about having no food with us .
I 'd vote for going back and getting something from the larder , only there does n't seem to be any certainty of getting into this country again when once you 've got out of it .
I think we 'll have to go on . "
" So do I , " said both the girls .
" If only we knew where the poor chap was imprisoned ! " said Peter .
They were all still , wondering what to do next , when Lucy said , " Look !
There 's a robin , with such a red breast .
It 's the first bird I 've seen here .
I say !
-- I wonder can birds talk in Narnia ?
It almost looks as if it wanted to say something to us . "
Then she turned to the Robin and said , " Please , can you tell us where Tumnus the Faun has been taken to ? "
As she said this she took a step towards the bird .
It at once hopped away but only as far as to the next tree .
There it perched and looked at them very hard as if it understood all they had been saying .
Almost without noticing that they had done so , the four children went a step or two nearer to it .
At this the Robin flew away again to the next tree and once more looked at them very hard .
( You could n't have found a robin with a redder chest or a brighter eye . )
" Do you know , " said Lucy , " I really believe he means us to follow him . "
" I 've an idea he does , " said Susan , " what do you think , Peter ? "
" Well , we might as well try it , " answered Peter .
The Robin appeared to understand the matter thoroughly .
It kept going from tree to tree , always a few yards ahead of them but always so near that they could easily follow it .
In this way it led them on , slightly down hill .
Wherever the Robin alighted a little shower of snow would fall off the branch .
Presently the clouds parted overhead and the winter sun came out and the snow all around them grew dazzlingly bright .
They had been travelling in this way for about half an hour , with the two girls in front , when Edmund said to Peter , " If you 're not still too high and mighty to talk to me , I 've something to say which you 'd better listen to . "
" What is it ? " asked Peter .
" Hush !
Not so loud , " said Edmund , " there 's no good frightening the girls .
But have you realised what we 're doing ? "
" What ? " said Peter , lowering his voice to a whisper .
" We 're following a guide we know nothing about .
How do we know which side that bird is on ?
Why should n't it be leading us into a trap ? "
" That 's a nasty idea .
Still -- a robin you know .
They 're good birds in all the stories I 've ever read .
I 'm sure a robin would n't be on the wrong side . "
" If it comes to that , which _is_ the right side ?
How do we know that the fauns are in the right and the Queen ( yes , I know we 've been _told_ she 's a witch ) is in the wrong ?
We do n't really know anything about either . "
" The Faun saved Lucy . "
" He _said_ he did .
But how do we know ?
And there 's another thing too .
Has anyone the least idea of the way home from here ? "
" Great Scott ! " said Peter , " I had n't thought of that . "
" And no chance of dinner either , " said Edmund .