Once there were four children whose names were Peter , Susan , Edmund and Lucy , and it has been told in another book called _The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe_ how they had a remarkable adventure .
They had opened the door of a magic wardrobe and found themselves in a quite different world from ours , and in that different world they had become Kings and Queens in a country called Narnia .
While they were in Narnia they seemed to reign for years and years ; but when they came back through the door and found themselves in England again , it all seemed to have taken no time at all .
At any rate , no one noticed that they had ever been away , and they never told anyone except one very wise grown - up .
That had all happened a year ago , and now all four of them were sitting on a seat at a railway station with trunks and playboxes piled up round them .
They were , in fact , on their way back to school .
They had travelled together as far as this station , which was a junction ; and here , in a few minutes , one train would arrive and take the girls away to one school , and in about half an hour another train would arrive and the boys would go off to another school .
The first part of the journey , when they were all together , always seemed to be part of the holidays ; but now when they would be saying good - by and going different ways so soon , everyone felt that the holidays were really over and everyone felt their term time feelings beginning again , and they were all rather gloomy and no - one could think of anything to say .
Lucy was going to boarding school for the first time .
It was an empty , sleepy , country station and there was hardly anyone on the platform except themselves .
Suddenly Lucy gave a sharp little cry , like someone who has been stung by a wasp .
" What 's up , Lu ? " said Edmund -- and then suddenly broke off and made a noise like " Ow ! "
" What on earth ---- " began Peter , and then he too suddenly changed what he had been going to say .
Instead , he said , " Susan , let go !
What are you doing ?
Where are you dragging me to ? "
" I 'm not touching you , " said Susan .
" Someone is pulling _me_ .
Oh -- oh -- oh -- stop it ! "
Everyone noticed that all the others ' faces had gone very white .
" I felt just the same , " said Edmund in a breathless voice .
" As if I were being dragged along .
A most frightful pulling -- ugh ! it 's beginning again . "
" Me too , " said Lucy .
" Oh , I ca n't bear it . "
" Look sharp ! " shouted Edmund .
" All catch hands and keep together .
This is magic -- I can tell by the feeling .
Quick ! "
" Yes , " said Susan .
" Hold hands .
Oh , I do wish it would stop -- oh ! "
Next moment the luggage , the seat , the platform , and the station had completely vanished .
The four children , holding hands and panting , found themselves standing in a woody place -- such a woody place that branches were sticking into them and there was hardly room to move .
They all rubbed their eyes and took a deep breath .
" Oh , Peter ! " exclaimed Lucy .
" Do you think we can possibly have got back to Narnia ? "
" It might be anywhere , " said Peter , " I ca n't see a yard in all these trees .
Let 's try to get into the open -- if there is any open . "
With some difficulty , and with some stings from nettles and pricks from thorns , they struggled out of the thicket .
Then they had another surprise .
Everything became much brighter , and after a few steps they found themselves at the edge of the wood , looking down on a sandy beach .
A few yards away a very calm sea was falling on the sand with such tiny ripples that it made hardly any sound .
There was no land in sight and no clouds in the sky .
The sun was about where it ought to be at ten o'clock in the morning , and the sea was a dazzling blue .
They stood sniffing in the sea - smell .
" By Jove ! " said Peter .
" This is good enough . "
Five minutes later everyone was barefooted and wading in the cool clear water .
" This is better than being in a stuffy train on the way back to Latin and French and Algebra ! " said Edmund .
And then for quite a long time there was no more talking , only splashing and looking for shrimps and crabs .
" All the same , " said Susan presently , " I suppose we 'll have to make some plans .
We shall want something to eat before long . "
" We 've got the sandwiches Mother gave us for the journey , " said Edmund .
" At least I 've got mine . "
" Not me , " said Lucy .
" Mine were in my little bag . "
" So were mine , " said Susan .
" Mine are in my coat - pocket , there on the beach , " said Peter .
" That 'll be two lunches among four .
This is n't going to be such fun . "
" At present , " said Lucy , " I want something to drink more than something to eat . "
Everyone else now felt thirsty , as one usually is after wading in salt water under a hot sun .
" It 's like being shipwrecked , " remarked Edmund .
" In the books they always find springs of clear , fresh water on the island .
We 'd better go and look for them . "
" Does that mean we have to go back into all that thick wood ? " said Susan .
" Not a bit of it , " said Peter .
" If there are streams they 're bound to come down to the sea , and if we walk along the beach we 're bound to come to them . "
They all now waded back and went first across the smooth , wet sand and then up to the dry , crumbly sand that sticks to one 's toes , and began putting on their shoes and socks .
Edmund and Lucy wanted to leave them behind and do their exploring with bare feet , but Susan said this would be a mad thing to do .
" We might never find them again , " she pointed out , " and we shall want them if we 're still here when night comes and it begins to be cold . "
When they were dressed again they set out along the shore with the sea on their left hand and the wood on their right .
Except for an occasional seagull it was a very quiet place .
The wood was so thick and tangled that they could hardly see into it at all ; and nothing in it moved -- not a bird , not even an insect .
Shells and seaweed and anemones , or tiny crabs in rock - pools , are all very well , but you soon get tired of them if you are thirsty .
The children 's feet , after the change from the cool water , felt hot and heavy .
Susan and Lucy had raincoats to carry .
Edmund had put down his coat on the station seat just before the magic overtook them , and he and Peter took it in turns to carry Peter 's great - coat .
Presently the shore began to curve round to the right .
About quarter of an hour later , after they had crossed a rocky ridge which ran out into a point , it made quite a sharp turn .
Their backs were now to the part of the sea which had met them when they first came out of the wood , and now , looking ahead , they could see across the water another shore , thickly wooded like the one they were exploring .
" I wonder , is that an island or do we join on to it presently ? " said Lucy .
" Do n't know , " said Peter and they all plodded on in silence .
The shore that they were walking on drew nearer and nearer to the opposite shore , and as they came round each promontory the children expected to find the place where the two joined .
But in this they were disappointed .
They came to some rocks which they had to climb and from the top they could see a fair way ahead and -- " Oh bother ! " said Edmund , " it 's no good .
We sha n't be able to get to those other woods at all .
We 're on an island ! "
It was true .
At this point the channel between them and the opposite coast was only about thirty or forty yards wide ; but they could now see that this was its narrowest place .
After that , their own coast bent round to the right again and they could see open sea between it and the mainland .
It was obvious that they had already come much more than half - way round the island .
" Look ! " said Lucy suddenly .
" What 's that ? "
She pointed to a long silvery , snake - like thing that lay across the beach .
" A stream !
A stream ! " shouted the others , and , tired as they were , they lost no time in clattering down the rocks and racing to the fresh water .
They knew that the stream would be better to drink farther up , away from the beach , so they went at once to the spot where it came out of the wood .
The trees were as thick as ever , but the stream had made itself a deep course between high mossy banks so that by stooping you could follow it up in a sort of tunnel of leaves .
They dropped on their knees by the first brown , dimply pool and drank and drank , and dipped their faces in the water , and then dipped their arms in up to the elbow .
" Now , " said Edmund , " what about those sandwiches ? "
" Oh , had n't we better save them ? " said Susan .
" We may need them far worse later on . "
" I do wish , " said Lucy , " now that we 're not thirsty , we could go on feeling as not - hungry as we did when we _were_ thirsty . "
" But what about those sandwiches ? " repeated Edmund .
" There 's no good saving them till they go bad .
You 've got to remember it 's a good deal hotter here than in England and we 've been carrying them about in pockets for hours . "
So they got out the two packets and divided them into four portions , and nobody had quite enough , but it was a great deal better than nothing .
Then they talked about their plans for the next meal .
Lucy wanted to go back to the sea and catch shrimps , until someone pointed out that they had no nets .
Edmund said they must gather gulls ' eggs from the rocks , but when they came to think of it they could n't remember having seen any gulls ' eggs and would n't be able to cook them if they found any .
Peter thought to himself that unless they had some stroke of luck they would soon be glad to eat eggs raw , but he did n't see any point in saying this out loud .
Susan said it was a pity they had eaten the sandwiches so soon .
One or two tempers very nearly got lost at this stage .
Finally Edmund said :
" Look here .
There 's only one thing to be done .
We must explore the wood .
Hermits and knights - errant and people like that always manage to live somehow if they 're in a forest .
They find roots and berries and things . "
" What sort of roots ? " asked Susan .
" I always thought it meant roots of trees , " said Lucy .
" Come on , " said Peter , " Ed is right .
And we must try to do something .
And it 'll be better than going out into the glare and the sun again . "
So they all got up and began to follow the stream .
It was very hard work .
They had to stoop under branches and climb over branches , and they blundered through great masses of stuff like rhododendrons and tore their clothes and got their feet wet in the stream ; and still there was no noise at all except the noise of the stream and the noises they were making themselves .
They were beginning to get very tired of it when they noticed a delicious smell , and then a flash of bright colour high above them at the top of the right bank .
" I say ! " exclaimed Lucy .
" I do believe that 's an apple tree . "
It was .
They panted up the steep bank , forced their way through some brambles , and found themselves standing round an old tree that was heavy with large yellowish - golden apples as firm and juicy as you could wish to see .
" And this is not the only tree , " said Edmund with his mouth full of apple .
" Look there -- and there . "
" Why , there are dozens of them , " said Susan , throwing away the core of her first apple and picking her second .
" This must have been an orchard -- long , long ago , before the place went wild and the wood grew up . "
" Then this was once an inhabited island , " said Peter .
" And what 's that ? " said Lucy , pointing ahead .
" By Jove , it 's a wall , " said Peter .
" An old stone wall . "
Pressing their way between the laden branches they reached the wall .
It was very old , and broken down in places , with moss and wallflowers growing on it , but it was higher than all but the tallest trees .
And when they came quite close to it they found a great arch which must once have had a gate in it but was now almost filled up with the largest of all the apple trees .
They had to break some of the branches to get past , and when they had done so they all blinked because the daylight became suddenly much brighter .
They found themselves in a wide open place with walls all round it .
In here there were no trees , only level grass and daisies , and ivy , and grey walls .
It was a bright , secret , quiet place , and rather sad ; and all four stepped out into the middle of it , glad to be able to straighten their backs and move their limbs freely .