When the whole party was finally awake Lucy had to tell her story for the fourth time .
The blank silence which followed it was as discouraging as anything could be .
" I ca n't see anything , " said Peter after he had stared his eyes sore .
" Can you , Susan ? "
" No , of course I ca n't , " snapped Susan .
" Because there is n't anything to see .
She 's been dreaming .
Do lie down and go to sleep , Lucy . "
" And I do hope , " said Lucy in a tremulous voice , " that you will all come with me .
Because -- because I 'll have to go with him whether anyone else does or not . "
" Do n't talk nonsense , Lucy , " said Susan .
" Of course you ca n't go off on your own .
Do n't let her , Peter .
She 's being downright naughty . "
" I 'll go with her , if she _must_ go , " said Edmund .
" She 's been right before . "
" I know she has , " said Peter .
" And she may have been right this morning .
We certainly had no luck going down the gorge .
Still -- at this hour of the night .
And why should Aslan be invisible to us ?
He never used to be .
It 's not like him .
What does the D.L.F. say ? "
" Oh , I say nothing at all , " answered the Dwarf .
" If you all go , of course , I 'll go with you ; and if your party splits up , I 'll go with the High King .
That 's my duty to him and King Caspian .
But , if you ask my private opinion , I 'm a plain dwarf who does n't think there 's much chance of finding a road by night where you could n't find one by day .
And I have no use for magic lions which are talking lions and do n't talk , and friendly lions though they do n't do us any good , and whopping big lions though nobody can see them .
It 's all bilge and beanstalks as far as I can see . "
" He 's beating his paw on the ground for us to hurry , " said Lucy .
" We must go _now_ .
At least I must . "
" You 've no right to try to force the rest of us like that .
It 's four to one and you 're the youngest , " said Susan .
" Oh , come on , " growled Edmund .
" We 've got to go .
There 'll be no peace till we do . "
He fully intended to back Lucy up , but he was annoyed at losing his night 's sleep and was making up for it by doing everything as sulkily as possible .
" On the march , then , " said Peter , wearily fitting his arm into his shield - strap and putting his helmet on .
At any other time he would have said something nice to Lucy , who was his favourite sister , for he knew how wretched she must be feeling , and he knew that , whatever had happened , it was not her fault .
But he could n't help being a little annoyed with her all the same .
Susan was the worst .
" Supposing _I_ started behaving like Lucy , " she said .
" I might threaten to stay here whether the rest of you went on or not .
I jolly well think I shall . "
" Obey the High King , your Majesty , " said Trumpkin , " and let 's be off .
If I 'm not to be allowed to sleep , I 'd as soon march as stand here talking . "
And so at last they got on the move .
Lucy went first , biting her lip and trying not to say all the things she thought of saying to Susan .
But she forgot them when she fixed her eyes on Aslan .
He turned and walked at a slow pace about thirty yards ahead of them .
The others had only Lucy 's directions to guide them , for Aslan was not only invisible to them but silent as well .
His big cat - like paws made no noise on the grass .
He led them to the right of the dancing trees -- whether they were still dancing nobody knew , for Lucy had her eyes on the Lion and the rest had their eyes on Lucy -- and nearer the edge of the gorge .
" Cobbles and kettle - drums ! " thought Trumpkin .
" I hope this madness is n't going to end in a moonlight climb and broken necks . "
For a long way Aslan went along the top of the precipices .
Then they came to a place where some little trees grew right on the edge .
He turned and disappeared among them .
Lucy held her breath , for it looked as if he had plunged over the cliff ; but she was too busy keeping him in sight to stop and think about this .
She quickened her pace and was soon among the trees herself .
Looking down , she could see a steep and narrow path going slant-wise down into the gorge between rocks , and Aslan descending it .
He turned and looked at her with his happy eyes .
Lucy clapped her hands and began to scramble down after him .
From behind her she heard the voices of the others shouting , " Hi !
Lucy !
Look out , for goodness ' sake .
You 're right on the edge of the gorge .
Come back ---- " and then , a moment later , Edmund 's voice saying , " No , she 's right .
There is a way down . "
Half - way down the path Edmund caught up with her .
" Look ! " he said in great excitement .
" Look !
What 's that shadow crawling down in front of us ? "
" It 's _his_ shadow , " said Lucy .
" I do believe you 're right , Lu , " said Edmund .
" I ca n't think how I did n't see it before .
But where is he ? "
" With his shadow , of course .
Ca n't you see him ? "
" Well , I almost thought I did -- for a moment .
It 's such a rum light . "
" Get on , King Edmund , get on , " came Trumpkin 's voice from behind and above : and then , farther behind and still nearly at the top , Peter 's voice saying , " Oh , buck up , Susan .
Give me your hand .
Why , a baby could get down here .
And do stop grousing . "
In a few minutes they were at the bottom and the roaring of water filled their ears .
Treading delicately , like a cat , Aslan stepped from stone to stone across the stream .
In the middle he stopped , bent down to drink , and as he raised his shaggy head , dripping from the water , he turned to face them again .
This time Edmund saw him .
" Oh , Aslan ! " he cried , darting forward .
But the Lion whisked round and began padding up the slope on the far side of the Rush .
" Peter , Peter , " cried Edmund .
" Did you see ? "
" I saw something , " said Peter .
" But it 's so tricky in this moonlight .
On we go , though , and three cheers for Lucy .
I do n't feel half so tired now , either . "
Aslan without hesitation led them to their left , farther up the gorge .
The whole journey was odd and dream - like -- the roaring stream , the wet grey grass , the glimmering cliffs which they were approaching , and always the glorious , silently pacing Beast ahead .
Everyone except Susan and the Dwarf could see him now .
Presently they came to another steep path , up the face of the further precipices .
These were far higher than the ones they had just descended , and the journey up them was a long and tedious zig - zag .
Fortunately the Moon shone right above the gorge so that neither side was in shadow .
Lucy was nearly blown when the tail and hind legs of Aslan disappeared over the top : but with one last effort she scrambled after him and came out , rather shaky - legged and breathless , on the hill they had been trying to reach ever since they left Glasswater .
The long gentle slope ( heather and grass and a few very big rocks that shone white in the moonlight ) stretched up to where it vanished in a glimmer of trees about half a mile away .
She knew it .
It was the hill of the Stone Table .
With a jingling of mail the others climbed up behind her .
Aslan glided on before them and they walked after him .
" Lucy , " said Susan in a very small voice .
" Yes ? " said Lucy .
" I see him now .
I 'm sorry . "
" That 's all right . "
" But I 've been far worse than you know .
I really believed it was him -- he , I mean -- yesterday .
When he warned us not to go down to the fir wood .
And I really believed it was him to - night , when you woke us up .
I mean , deep down inside .
Or I could have , if I 'd let myself .
But I just wanted to get out of the woods and -- and -- oh , I do n't know .
And what ever am I to say to him ? "
" Perhaps you wo n't need to say much , " suggested Lucy .
Soon they reached the trees and through them the children could see the Great Mound , Aslan 's How , which had been raised over the Table since their days .
" Our side do n't keep very good watch , " muttered Trumpkin .
" We ought to have been challenged before now ---- "
" Hush ! " said the other four , for now Aslan had stopped and turned and stood facing them , looking so majestic that they felt as glad as anyone can who feels afraid , and as afraid as anyone can who feels glad .
The boys strode forward : Lucy made way for them : Susan and the Dwarf shrank back .
" Oh , Aslan , " said King Peter , dropping on one knee and raising the Lion 's heavy paw to his face , " I 'm so glad .
And I 'm so sorry .
I 've been leading them wrong ever since we started and especially yesterday morning . "
" My dear son , " said Aslan .
Then he turned and welcomed Edmund .
" Well done , " were his words .
Then , after an awful pause , the deep voice said , " Susan . "
Susan made no answer but the others thought she was crying .
" You have listened to fears , child , " said Aslan .
" Come , let me breathe on you .
Forget them .
Are you brave again ? "
" A little , Aslan , " said Susan .
" And now ! " said Aslan in a much louder voice with just a hint of a roar in it , while his tail lashed his flanks .
" And now , where is this little Dwarf , this famous swordsman and archer , who does n't believe in lions ?
Come here , son of Earth , come HERE ! "
-- and the last word was no longer the hint of a roar but almost the real thing .
" Wraiths and wreckage ! " gasped Trumpkin in the ghost of a voice .
The children , who knew Aslan well enough to see that he liked the Dwarf very much , were not disturbed ; but it was quite another thing for Trumpkin , who had never seen a lion before , let alone this Lion .
He did the only sensible thing he could have done ; that is , instead of bolting , he tottered towards Aslan .
Aslan pounced .
Have you ever seen a very young kitten being carried in the mother cat 's mouth ?
It was like that .
The Dwarf , hunched up in a little , miserable ball , hung from Aslan 's mouth .
The Lion gave him one shake and all his armour rattled like a tinker 's pack and then -- hey - presto -- the Dwarf flew up in the air .
He was as safe as if he had been in bed , though he did not feel so .
As he came down the huge velvety paws caught him as gently as a mother 's arms and set him ( right way up , too ) on the ground .
" Son of Earth , shall we be friends ? " asked Aslan .
" Ye -- he -- he -- hes , " panted the Dwarf , for it had not yet got its breath back .
" Now , " said Aslan .
" The Moon is setting .
Look behind you : there is the dawn beginning .
We have no time to lose .
You three , you sons of Adam and son of Earth , hasten into the Mound and deal with what you will find there . "
The Dwarf was still speechless and neither of the boys dared to ask if Aslan would follow them .
All three drew their swords and saluted , then turned and jingled away into the dusk .
Lucy noticed that there was no sign of weariness in their faces : both the High King and King Edmund looked more like men than boys .
The girls watched them out of sight , standing close beside Aslan .
The light was changing .
Low down in the east , Aravir , the morning star of Narnia , gleamed like a little moon .
Aslan , who seemed larger than before , lifted his head , shook his mane and roared .
The sound , deep and throbbing at first like an organ beginning on a low note , rose and became louder , and then far louder again , till the earth and air were shaking with it .
It rose up from that hill and floated across all Narnia .
Down in Miraz 's camp men woke , stared palely in one another 's faces , and grasped their weapons .
Down below that in the Great River , now at its coldest hour , the heads and shoulders of the nymphs , and the great weedy - bearded head of the river - god , rose from the water .
Beyond it , in every field and wood , the alert ears of rabbits rose from their holes , the sleepy heads of birds came out from under wings , owls hooted , vixens barked , hedgehogs grunted , the trees stirred .
In towns and villages mothers pressed babies close to their breasts , staring with wild eyes , dogs whimpered , and men leaped up groping for lights .
Far away on the northern frontier the mountain giants peered from the dark gateways of their castles .
What Lucy and Susan saw was a dark something coming to them from almost every direction across the hills .
It looked first like a black mist creeping on the ground , then like the stormy waves of a black sea rising higher and higher as it came on , and then , at last , like what it was -- woods on the move .
All the trees of the world appeared to be rushing towards Aslan .
But as they drew nearer they looked less like trees , and when the whole crowd , bowing and curtsying and waving thin long arms to Aslan , were all around Lucy , she saw that it was a crowd of human shapes .
Pale birch - girls were tossing their heads , willow - women pushed back their hair from their brooding faces to gaze on Aslan , the queenly beeches stood still and adored him , shaggy oak - men , lean and melancholy elms , shock - headed hollies ( dark themselves , but their wives all bright with berries ) and gay rowans , all bowed and rose again , shouting , " Aslan , Aslan ! " in their various husky or creaking or wave - like voices .
The crowd and the dance round Aslan ( for it had become a dance once more ) grew so thick and rapid that Lucy was confused .
She never saw where certain other people came from who were soon capering about among the trees .
One was a youth , dressed only in a fawn - skin , with vine - leaves wreathed in his curly hair .
His face would have been almost too pretty for a boy 's , if it had not looked so extremely wild .
You felt , as Edmund said when he saw him a few days later , " There 's a chap who might do anything -- absolutely anything . "
He seemed to have a great many names -- Bromios , Bassareus , and the Ram were three of them .
There were a lot of girls with him , as wild as he .
There was even , unexpectedly , someone on a donkey .
And everybody was laughing : and every body was shouting out , " Euan , euan , eu - oi - oi - oi . "
" Is it a Romp , Aslan ? " cried the youth .
And apparently it was .
But nearly everyone seemed to have a different idea as to what they were playing .
It may have been Tig , but Lucy never discovered who was It .
It was rather like Blind Man 's Buff , only everyone behaved as if they were blindfolded .
It was not unlike Hunt the Slipper , but the slipper was never found .
What made it more complicated was that the man on the donkey , who was old and enormously fat , began calling out at once , " Refreshments !
Time for refreshments , " and falling off his donkey and being bundled on to it again by the others , while the donkey was under the impression that the whole thing was a circus , and tried to give a display of walking on its hind legs .
And all the time there were more and more vine leaves everywhere .
And soon not only leaves but vines .
They were climbing up everything .
They were running up the legs of the tree people and circling round their necks .
Lucy put up her hands to push back her hair and found she was pushing back vine branches .
The donkey was a mass of them .
His tail was completely entangled and something dark was nodding between his ears .
Lucy looked again and saw it was a bunch of grapes .
After that it was mostly grapes -- overhead and underfoot and all around .
" Refreshments !
Refreshments , " roared the old man .
Everyone began eating , and whatever hothouses your people may have , you have never tasted such grapes .
Really good grapes , firm and tight on the outside , but bursting into cool sweetness when you put them into your mouth , were one of the things the girls had never had quite enough of before .
Here , there were more than anyone could possibly want , and no table - manners at all .
One saw sticky and stained fingers everywhere , and , though mouths were full , the laughter never ceased nor the yodelling cries of _Euan , euan , eu - oi - oi - oi - oi_ , till all of a sudden everyone felt at the same moment that the game ( whatever it was ) , and the feast , ought to be over , and everyone flopped down breathless on the ground and turned their faces to Aslan to hear what he would say next .
At that moment the sun was just rising and Lucy remembered something and whispered to Susan ,
" I say , Su , I know who they are . "
" Who ? "
" The boy with the wild face is Bacchus and the old one on the donkey is Silenus .
Do n't you remember Mr Tumnus telling us about them long ago ? "
" Yes , of course .
But I say , Lu ---- "
" What ? "
" I would n't have felt very safe with Bacchus and all his wild girls if we 'd met them without Aslan . "
" I should think not , " said Lucy .