Prince Caspian lived in a great castle in the centre of Narnia with his uncle , Miraz , the King of Narnia , and his aunt , who had red hair and was called Queen Prunaprismia .
His father and mother were dead and the person whom Caspian loved best was his nurse , and though ( being a prince ) he had wonderful toys which would do almost anything but talk , he liked best the last hour of the day when the toys had all been put back in their cupboards and Nurse would tell him stories .
He did not care much for his uncle and aunt , but about twice a week his uncle would send for him and they would walk up and down together for half an hour on the terrace at the south side of the castle .
One day , while they were doing this , the King said to him ,
" Well , boy , we must soon teach you to ride and use a sword .
You know that your aunt and I have no children , so it looks as if you might have to be King when I 'm gone .
How shall you like that , eh ? "
" I do n't know , Uncle , " said Caspian .
" Do n't know , eh ? " said Miraz .
" Why , I should like to know what more anyone could wish for ! "
" All the same , I _do_ wish , " said Caspian .
" What do you wish ? " asked the King .
" I wish -- I wish -- I wish I could have lived in the Old Days , " said Caspian .
( He was only a very little boy at the time . )
Up till now King Miraz had been talking in the tiresome way that some grown - ups have , which makes it quite clear that they are not really interested in what they are saying , but now he suddenly gave Caspian a very sharp look .
" Eh ?
What 's that ? " he said .
" What old days do you mean ? "
" Oh , do n't you know , Uncle ? " said Caspian .
" When everything was quite different .
When all the animals could talk , and there were nice people who lived in the streams and the trees .
Naiads and Dryads they were called .
And there were Dwarfs .
And there were lovely little Fauns in all the woods .
They had feet like goats .
And ---- "
" That 's all nonsense , for babies , " said the King sternly .
" Only fit for babies , do you hear ?
You 're getting too old for that sort of stuff .
At your age you ought to be thinking of battles and adventures , not fairy tales . "
" Oh , but there _were_ battles and adventures in those days , " said Caspian .
" Wonderful adventures .
Once there was a White Witch and she made herself Queen of the whole country .
And she made it so that it was always winter .
And then two boys and two girls came from somewhere and so they killed the Witch and they were made Kings and Queens of Narnia , and their names were Peter and Susan and Edmund and Lucy .
And so they reigned for ever so long and everyone had a lovely time , and it was all because of Aslan ---- "
" Who 's he ? " said Miraz .
And if Caspian had been a very little older , the tone of his uncle 's voice would have warned him that it would be wiser to shut up .
But he babbled on ,
" Oh , do n't you know ? " he said .
" Aslan is the great Lion who comes from over the sea . "
" Who has been telling you all this nonsense ? " said the King in a voice of thunder .
Caspian was frightened and said nothing .
" Your Royal Highness , " said King Miraz , letting go of Caspian 's hand , which he had been holding till now , " I insist upon being answered .
Look me in the face .
Who has been telling you this pack of lies ? "
" N -- Nurse , " faltered Caspian , and burst into tears .
" Stop that noise , " said his uncle , taking Caspian by the shoulders and giving him a shake .
" Stop it .
And never let me catch you talking -- or _thinking_ either -- about all those silly stories again .
There never were those Kings and Queens .
How could there be two Kings at the same time ?
And there 's no such person as Aslan .
And there are no such things as lions .
And there never was a time when animals could talk .
Do you hear ? "
" Yes , Uncle , " sobbed Caspian .
" Then let 's have no more of it , " said the King .
Then he called to one of the gentlemen - in-waiting who were standing at the far end of the terrace and said in a cold voice , " Conduct His Royal Highness to his apartments and send His Royal Highness 's nurse to me AT ONCE . "
Next day Caspian found what a terrible thing he had done , for Nurse had been sent away without even being allowed to say good - bye to him , and he was told he was to have a Tutor .
Caspian missed his nurse very much and shed many tears ; and because he was so miserable , he thought about the old stories of Narnia far more than before .
He dreamed of Dwarfs and Dryads every night and tried very hard to make the dogs and cats in the castle talk to him .
But the dogs only wagged their tails and the cats only purred .
Caspian felt sure that he would hate the new Tutor , but when the new Tutor arrived about a week later he turned out to be the sort of person it is almost impossible not to like .
He was the smallest , and also the fattest , man Caspian had ever seen .
He had a long , silvery , pointed beard which came down to his waist , and his face , which was brown and covered with wrinkles , looked very wise , very ugly , and very kind .
His voice was grave and his eyes were merry so that , until you got to know him really well , it was hard to know when he was joking and when he was serious .
His name was Doctor Cornelius .
Of all his lessons with Doctor Cornelius the one that Caspian liked best was History .
Up till now , except for Nurse 's stories , he had known nothing about the History of Narnia , and he was very surprised to learn that the royal family were newcomers in the country .
" It was your Highness 's ancestor , Caspian the First , " said Doctor Cornelius , " who first conquered Narnia and made it his kingdom .
It was he who brought all your nation into the country .
You are not native Narnians at all .
You are all Telmarines -- that is , you all came from the Land of Telmar , far beyond the Western Mountains .
That is why Caspian the First is called Caspian the Conqueror . "
" Please , Doctor , " asked Caspian one day , " who lived in Narnia before we all came here out of Telmar ? "
" No men -- or very few -- lived in Narnia before the Telmarines took it , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" Then who did my great - great - grandcesters conquer ? "
" _Whom_ , not _who_ , your Highness , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" Perhaps it is time to turn from History to Grammar . "
" Oh please , not yet , " said Caspian .
" I mean , was n't there a battle ?
Why is he called Caspian the Conqueror if there was nobody here to fight with him ? "
" I said there were very few _men_ in Narnia , " said the Doctor , looking at the little boy very strangely through his great spectacles .
For a moment Caspian was puzzled and then suddenly his heart gave a leap .
" Do you mean , " he gasped , " that there were other things ?
Do you mean it was like in the stories ?
Were there ---- ? "
" Hush ! " said Doctor Cornelius , laying his head very close to Caspian 's .
" Not a word more .
Do n't you know your nurse was sent away for telling you about Old Narnia ?
The King does n't like it .
If he found me telling you secrets , you 'd be whipped and I should have my head cut off . "
" But why ? " asked Caspian .
" It is high time we turned to Grammar now , " said Doctor Cornelius , in a loud voice .
" Will your Royal Highness be pleased to open Pulverulentus Siccus at the fourth page of his _Grammatical Garden or the Arbour of Accidence pleasantlie open 'd to Tender Wits_ ? "
After that it was all nouns and verbs till lunchtime , but I do n't think Caspian learned much .
He was too excited .
He felt sure that Doctor Cornelius would not have said so much unless he meant to tell him more sooner or later .
In this he was not disappointed .
A few days later his Tutor said , " To - night I am going to give you a lesson in Astronomy .
At dead of night two noble planets , Tarva and Alambil , will pass within one degree of each other .
Such a conjunction has not occurred for two hundred years , and your Highness will not live to see it again .
It will be best if you go to bed a little earlier than usual .
When the time of the conjunction draws near I will come and wake you . "
This did n't seem to have anything to do with Old Narnia , which was what Caspian really wanted to hear about , but getting up in the middle of the night is always interesting and he was moderately pleased .
When he went to bed that night , he thought at first that he would not be able to sleep ; but he soon dropped off and it seemed only a few minutes before he felt someone gently shaking him .
He sat up in bed and saw that the room was full of moonlight .
Doctor Cornelius , muffled in a hooded robe and holding a small lamp in his hand , stood by the bedside .
Caspian remembered at once what they were going to do .
He got up and put on some clothes .
Although it was a summer night he felt colder than he had expected and was quite glad when the Doctor wrapped him in a robe like his own and gave him a pair of warm , soft buskins for his feet .
A moment later , both muffled so that they could hardly be seen in the dark corridors , and both shod so that they made almost no noise , master and pupil left the room .
Caspian followed the Doctor through many passages and up several staircases , and at last , through a little door in a turret , they came out upon the leads .
On one side were the battlements , on the other a steep roof ; below them , all shadowy and shimmery , the castle gardens ; above them , stars and moon .
Presently they came to another door , which led into the great central tower of the whole castle : Doctor Cornelius unlocked it and they began to climb the dark winding stair of the tower .
Caspian was becoming excited ; he had never been allowed up this stair before .
It was long and steep , but when they came out on the roof of the tower and Caspian had got his breath , he felt that it had been well worth it .
Away on his right he could see , rather indistinctly , the Western Mountains .
On his left was the gleam of the Great River , and everything was so quiet that he could hear the sound of the waterfall at Beaversdam , a mile away .
There was no difficulty in picking out the two stars they had come to see .
They hung rather low in the southern sky , almost as bright as two little moons and very close together .
" Are they going to have a collision ? " he asked in an awe - struck voice .
" Nay , dear Prince , " said the Doctor ( and he too spoke in a whisper ) .
" The great lords of the upper sky know the steps of their dance too well for that .
Look well upon them .
Their meeting is fortunate and means some great good for the sad realm of Narnia .
Tarva , the Lord of Victory , salutes Alambil , the Lady of Peace .
They are just coming to their nearest . "
" It 's a pity that tree gets in the way , " said Caspian .
" We 'd really see better from the West Tower , though it is not so high . "
Doctor Cornelius said nothing for about two minutes , but stood still with his eyes fixed on Tarva and Alambil .
Then he drew a deep breath and turned to Caspian .
" There , " he said .
" You have seen what no man now alive has seen , nor will see again .
And you are right .
We should have seen it even better from the smaller tower .
I brought you here for another reason . "
Caspian looked up at him , but the Doctor 's hood concealed most of his face .
" The virtue of this tower , " said Doctor Cornelius , " is that we have six empty rooms beneath us , and a long stair , and the door at the bottom of the stair is locked .
We can not be overheard . "
" Are you going to tell me what you would n't tell me the other day ? " said Caspian .
" I am , " said the Doctor .
" But remember .
You and I must never talk about these things except here -- on the very top of the Great Tower . "
" No .
That 's a promise , " said Caspian .
" But do go on please . "
" Listen , " said the Doctor .
" All you have heard about Old Narnia is true .
It is not the land of Men .
It is the country of Aslan , the country of the Waking Trees and Visible Naiads , of Fauns and Satyrs , of Dwarfs and Giants , of the gods and the Centaurs , of Talking Beasts .
It was against these that the first Caspian fought .
It is you Telmarines who silenced the beasts and the trees and the fountains , and who killed and drove away the Dwarfs and Fauns , and are now trying to cover up even the memory of them .
The King does not allow them to be spoken of . "
" Oh , I do wish we had n't , " said Caspian .
" And I _am_ glad it was all true , even if it is all over . "
" Many of your race wish that in secret , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" But , Doctor , " said Caspian , " why do you say _my_ race ?
After all , I suppose you 're a Telmarine too . "
" Am I ? " said the Doctor .
" Well , you 're a Man anyway , " said Caspian .
" Am I ? " repeated the Doctor in a deeper voice , at the same moment throwing back his hood so that Caspian could see his face clearly in the moonlight .
All at once Caspian realised the truth and felt that he ought to have realised it long before .
Doctor Cornelius was so small , and so fat , and had such a very long beard .
Two thoughts came into his head at the same moment .
One was a thought of terror -- " He 's not a real man , not a man at all , he 's a _Dwarf_ , and he 's brought me up here to kill me . "
The other was sheer delight -- " There are real Dwarfs still , and I 've seen one at last . "
" So you 've guessed it in the end , " said Doctor Cornelius .
" Or guessed it nearly right .
I 'm not a pure Dwarf .
I have human blood in me too .
Many Dwarfs escaped in the great battles and lived on , shaving their beards and wearing high - heeled shoes and pretending to be men .
They have mixed with your Telmarines .
I am one of those , only a half - Dwarf , and if any of my kindred , the true Dwarfs , are still alive anywhere in the world , doubtless they would despise me and call me a traitor .
But never in all these years have we forgotten our own people and all the other happy creatures of Narnia , and the long - lost days of freedom . "
" I 'm -- I 'm sorry , Doctor , " said Caspian .
" It was n't my fault , you know . "
" I am not saying these things in blame of you , dear Prince , " answered the Doctor .
" You may well ask why I say them at all .
But I have two reasons .
Firstly , because my old heart has carried these secret memories so long that it aches with them and would burst if I did not whisper them to you .
But secondly , for this : that when you become King you may help us , for I know that you also , Telmarine though you are , love the Old Things . "
" I do , I do , " said Caspian .
" But how can I help ? "
" You can be kind to the poor remnants of the Dwarf people , like myself .
You can gather learned magicians and try to find a way of awaking the trees once more .
You can search through all the nooks and wild places of the land to see if any Fauns or Talking Beasts or Dwarfs are perhaps still alive in hiding . "
" Do you think there are any ? " asked Caspian eagerly .
" I do n't know -- I do n't know , " said the Doctor with a deep sigh .
" Sometimes I am afraid there ca n't be .
I have been looking for traces of them all my life .
Sometimes I have thought I heard a Dwarf - drum in the mountains .
Sometimes at night , in the woods , I thought I had caught a glimpse of Fauns and Satyrs dancing a long way off ; but when I came to the place , there was never anything there .
I have often despaired ; but something always happens to start me hoping again .
I do n't know .
But at least you can try to be a King like the High King Peter of old , and not like your uncle . "
" Then it 's true about the Kings and Queens too , and about the White Witch ? " said Caspian .
" Certainly it is true , " said Cornelius .
" Their reign was the Golden Age in Narnia and the land has never forgotten them . "
" Did they live in this castle , Doctor ? "
" Nay , my dear , " said the old man .
" This castle is a thing of yesterday .
Your great - great - grandfather built it .
But when the two sons of Adam and the two daughters of Eve were made Kings and Queens of Narnia by Aslan himself , they lived in the castle of Cair Paravel .
No man alive has seen that blessed place and perhaps even the ruins of it have now vanished .
But we believe it was far from here , down at the mouth of the Great River , on the very shore of the sea . "
" Ugh ! " said Caspian with a shudder .
" Do you mean in the Black Woods ?
Where all the -- the -- you know , the ghosts live ? "
" Your Highness speaks as you have been taught , " said the Doctor .
" But it is all lies .
There are no ghosts there .
That is a story invented by the Telmarines .
Your Kings are in deadly fear of the sea because they can never quite forget that in all stories Aslan comes from over the sea .
They do n't want to go near it and they do n't want anyone else to go near it .
So they have let great woods grow up to cut their people off from the coast .
But because they have quarrelled with the trees they are afraid of the woods .
And because they are afraid of the woods they imagine that they are full of ghosts .
And the Kings and great men , hating both the sea and the wood , partly believe these stories , and partly encourage them .
They feel safer if no one in Narnia dares to go down to the coast and look out to sea -- towards Aslan 's land and the morning and the eastern end of the world . "
There was a deep silence between them for a few minutes .
Then Doctor Cornelius said , " Come .
We have been here long enough .
It is time to go down and to bed . "
" Must we ? " said Caspian .
" I 'd like to go on talking about these things for hours and hours and hours . "
" Someone might begin looking for us , if we did that , " said Doctor Cornelius .