Now began the happiest times that Caspian had ever known .
On a fine summer morning when the dew lay on the grass he set off with the Badger and the two Dwarfs , up through the forest to a high saddle in the mountains and down on to their sunny southern slopes where one looked across the green wolds of Archenland .
" We will go first to the Three Bulgy Bears , " said Trumpkin .
They came in a glade to an old hollow oak tree covered with moss , and Trufflehunter tapped with his paw three times on the trunk and there was no answer .
Then he tapped again and a woolly sort of voice from inside said , " Go away .
It 's not time to get up yet . "
But when he tapped the third time there was a noise like a small earthquake from inside and a sort of door opened and out came three brown bears , very bulgy indeed and blinking their little eyes .
And when everything had been explained to them ( which took a long time because they were so sleepy ) they said , just as Trufflehunter had said , that a son of Adam ought to be King of Narnia and all kissed Caspian -- very wet , snuffly kisses they were -- and offered him some honey .
Caspian did not really want honey , without bread , at that time in the morning , but he thought it polite to accept .
It took him a long time afterwards to get unsticky .
After that they went on till they came among tall beech trees and Trufflehunter called out , " Pattertwig !
Pattertwig !
Pattertwig ! " and almost at once , bounding down from branch to branch till he was just above their heads , came the most magnificent red squirrel that Caspian had ever seen .
He was far bigger than the ordinary dumb squirrels which he had sometimes seen in the castle gardens ; indeed he was nearly the size of a terrier and the moment you looked in his face you saw that he could talk .
Indeed the difficulty was to get him to stop talking , for , like all squirrels , he was a chatterer .
He welcomed Caspian at once and asked if he would like a nut and Caspian said thanks , he would .
But as Pattertwig went bounding away to fetch it , Trufflehunter whispered in Caspian 's ear , " Do n't look .
Look the other way .
It 's very bad manners among squirrels to watch anyone going to his store or to look as if you wanted to know where it was . "
Then Pattertwig came back with the nut and Caspian ate it and after that Pattertwig asked if he could take any messages to other friends .
" For I can go nearly everywhere without setting foot to ground , " he said .
Trufflehunter and the Dwarfs thought this a very good idea and gave Pattertwig messages to all sorts of people with queer names telling them all to come to a feast and council on Dancing Lawn at midnight three nights ahead .
" And you 'd better tell the three Bulgies too , " added Trumpkin .
" We forgot to mention it to them . "
Their next visit was to the Seven Brothers of Shuddering Wood .
Trumpkin led the way back to the saddle and then down eastward on the northern slope of the mountains till they came to a very solemn place among rocks and fir trees .
They went very quietly and presently Caspian could feel the ground shake under his feet as if someone were hammering down below .
Trumpkin went to a flat stone about the size of the top of a water - butt , and stamped on it with his foot .
After a long pause it was moved away by someone or something underneath , and there was a dark , round hole with a good deal of heat and steam coming out of it and in the middle of the hole the head of a Dwarf very like Trumpkin himself .
There was a long talk here and the Dwarf seemed more suspicious than the Squirrel or the Bulgy Bears had been , but in the end the whole party were invited to come down .
Caspian found himself descending a dark stairway into the earth , but when he came to the bottom he saw firelight .
It was the light of a furnace .
The whole place was a smithy .
A subterranean stream ran past on one side of it .
Two Dwarfs were at the bellows , another was holding a piece of red - hot metal on the anvil with a pair of tongs , a fourth was hammering it , and two , wiping their horny little hands on a greasy cloth , were coming forward to meet the visitors .
It took some time to satisfy them that Caspian was a friend and not an enemy , but when they did , they all cried , " Long live the King , " and their gifts were noble -- mail shirts and helmets and swords for Caspian and Trumpkin and Nikabrik .
The Badger could have had the same if he had liked , but he said he was a beast , he was , and if his claws and teeth could not keep his skin whole , it was n't worth keeping .
The workmanship of the arms was far finer than any Caspian had ever seen , and he gladly accepted the Dwarf - made sword instead of his own , which looked , in comparison , as feeble as a toy and as clumsy as a stick .
The seven brothers ( who were all Red Dwarfs ) promised to come to the feast at Dancing Lawn .
A little farther on , in a dry , rocky ravine they reached the cave of five Black Dwarfs .
They looked suspiciously at Caspian , but in the end the eldest of them said , " If he is against Miraz , we 'll have him for King . "
And the next oldest said , " Shall we go farther up for you , up to the crags ?
There 's an Ogre or two and a Hag that we could introduce you to , up there . "
" Certainly not , " said Caspian .
" I should think not , indeed , " said Trufflehunter .
" We want none of that sort on our side . "
Nikabrik disagreed with this , but Trumpkin and the Badger overruled him .
It gave Caspian a shock to realise that the horrible creatures out of the old stories , as well as the nice ones , had some descendants in Narnia still .
" We should not have Aslan for our friend if we brought in that rabble , " said Trufflehunter as they came away from the cave of the Black Dwarfs .
" Oh , Aslan ! " said Trumpkin , cheerily but contemptuously .
" What matters much more is that you would n't have me . "
" Do you believe in Aslan ? " said Caspian to Nikabrik .
" I 'll believe in anyone or anything , " said Nikabrik , " that 'll batter these cursed Telmarine barbarians to pieces or drive them out of Narnia .
Anyone or anything , Aslan _or_ the White Witch , do you understand ? "
" Silence , silence , " said Trufflehunter .
" You do not know what you are saying .
She was a worse enemy than Miraz and all his race . "
" Not to Dwarfs , she was n't , " said Nikabrik .
Their next visit was a pleasanter one .
As they came lower down , the mountains opened out into a great glen or wooded gorge with a swift river running at the bottom .
The open places near the river 's edge were a mass of foxgloves and wild roses and the air was buzzing with bees .
Here Trufflehunter called again , " Glenstorm !
Glenstorm ! " and after a pause Caspian heard the sound of hoofs .
It grew louder till the valley trembled and at last , breaking and trampling the thickets , there came in sight the noblest creatures that Caspian had yet seen , the great Centaur Glenstorm and his three sons .
His flanks were glossy chestnut and the beard that covered his broad chest was golden - red .
He was a prophet and a star - gazer and knew what they had come about .
" Long live the King , " he cried .
" I and my sons are ready for war .
When is the battle to be joined ? "
Up till now neither Caspian nor the others had really been thinking of a war .
They had some vague idea , perhaps , of an occasional raid on some Human farmstead or of attacking a party of hunters , if it ventured too far into these southern wilds .
But , in the main , they had thought only of living to themselves in woods and caves and building up an attempt at Old Narnia in hiding .
As soon as Glenstorm had spoken everyone felt much more serious .
" Do you mean a real war to drive Miraz out of Narnia ? " asked Caspian .
" What else ? " said the Centaur .
" Why else does your Majesty go clad in mail and girt with sword ? "
" Is it possible , Glenstorm ? " said the Badger .
" The time is ripe , " said Glenstorm .
" I watch the skies , Badger , for it is mine to watch , as it is yours to remember .
Tarva and Alambil have met in the halls of high heaven , and on earth a son of Adam has once more arisen to rule and name the creatures .
The hour has struck .
Our council at the Dancing Lawn must be a council of war . "
He spoke in such a voice that neither Caspian nor the others hesitated for a moment : it now seemed to them quite possible that they might win a war and quite certain that they must wage one .
As it was now past the middle of the day , they rested with the Centaurs and ate such food as the Centaurs provided -- cakes of oaten meal , and apples , and herbs , and wine , and cheese .
The next place they were to visit was quite near at hand , but they had to go a long way round in order to avoid a region in which Men lived .
It was well into the afternoon before they found themselves in level fields , warm between hedgerows .
There Trufflehunter called at the mouth of a little hole in a green bank and out popped the last thing Caspian expected -- a Talking Mouse .
He was of course bigger than a common mouse , well over a foot high when he stood on his hind legs , and with ears nearly as long ( though broader ) than a rabbit 's .
His name was Reepicheep and he was a gay and martial mouse .
He wore a tiny little rapier at his side and twirled his long whiskers as if they were a moustache .
" There are twelve of us , Sire , " he said with a dashing and graceful bow , " and I place all the resources of my people unreservedly at your Majesty 's disposal . "
Caspian tried hard ( and successfully ) not to laugh , but he could n't help thinking that Reepicheep and all his people could very easily be put in a washing basket and carried home on one 's back .
It would take too long to mention all the creatures whom Caspian met that day -- Clodsley Shovel the Mole , the three Hardbiters ( who were badgers like Trufflehunter ) , Camillo the Hare , and Hogglestock the Hedgehog .
They rested at last beside a well at the edge of a wide and level circle of grass , bordered with tall elms which now threw long shadows across it , for the sun was setting , the daisies closing , and the rooks flying home to bed .
Here they supped on food they had brought with them and Trumpkin lit his pipe ( Nikabrik was not a smoker ) .
" Now , " said the Badger , " if only we could wake the spirits of these trees and this well , we should have done a good day 's work . "
" Ca n't we ? " said Caspian .
" No , " said Trufflehunter .
" We have no power over them .
Since the Humans came into the land , felling forests and defiling streams , the Dryads and Naiads have sunk into a deep sleep .
Who knows if ever they will stir again ?
And that is a great loss to our side .
The Telmarines are horribly afraid of the woods , and once the Trees moved in anger , our enemies would go mad with fright and be chased out of Narnia as quick as their legs could carry them . "
" What imaginations you Animals have ! " said Trumpkin , who did n't believe in such things .
" But why stop at Trees and Waters ?
Would n't it be even nicer if the stones started throwing themselves at old Miraz ? "
The Badger only grunted at this , and after that there was such a silence that Caspian had nearly dropped off to sleep when he thought he heard a faint musical sound from the depth of the woods at his back .
Then he thought it was only a dream and turned over again ; but as soon as his ear touched the ground he felt or heard ( it was hard to tell which ) a faint beating or drumming .
He raised his head .
The beating noise at once became fainter , but the music returned , clearer this time .
It was like flutes .
He saw that Trufflehunter was sitting up staring into the wood .
The moon was bright ; Caspian had been asleep longer than he thought .
Nearer and nearer came the music , a tune wild and yet dreamy , and the noise of many light feet , till at last , out from the wood into the moonlight , came dancing shapes such as Caspian had been thinking of all his life .
They were not much taller than Dwarfs , but far slighter and more graceful .
Their curly heads had little horns , the upper part of their bodies gleamed naked in the pale light , but their legs and feet were those of goats .
" Fauns ! " cried Caspian , jumping up , and in a moment they were all round him .
It took next to no time to explain the whole situation to them and they accepted Caspian at once .
Before he knew what he was doing he found himself joining in the dance .
Trumpkin , with heavier and jerkier movements , did likewise and even Trufflehunter hopped and lumbered about as best he could .
Only Nikabrik stayed where he was , looking on in silence .
The Fauns footed it all round Caspian to their reedy pipes .
Their strange faces , which seemed mournful and merry all at once , looked into his ; dozens of Fauns , Mentius and Obentinus and Dumnus , Voluns , Voltinus , Girbius , Nimienus , Nausus and Oscuns .
Pattertwig had sent them all .
When Caspian awoke next morning he could hardly believe that it had not all been a dream ; but the grass was covered with little cloven hoof - marks .