Susan and the two boys were bitterly tired with rowing before they rounded the last headland and began the final pull up Glasswater itself , and Lucy 's head ached from the long hours of sun and the glare on the water .
Even Trumpkin longed for the voyage to be over .
The seat on which he sat to steer had been made for men , not Dwarfs , and his feet did not reach the floor - boards ; and everyone knows how uncomfortable that is even for ten minutes .
And as they all grew more tired , their spirits fell .
Up till now the children had only been thinking of how to get to Caspian .
Now they wondered what they would do when they found him , and how a handful of Dwarfs and woodland creatures could defeat an army of grown - up Humans .
Twilight was coming on as they rowed slowly up the windings of Glasswater Creek -- a twilight which deepened as the banks drew closer together and the overhanging trees began almost to meet overhead .
It was very quiet in here as the sound of the sea died away behind them ; they could even hear the trickle of the little streams that poured down from the forest into Glasswater .
They went ashore at last , far too tired to attempt lighting a fire ; and even a supper of apples ( though most of them felt that they never wanted to see an apple again ) seemed better than trying to catch or shoot anything .
After a little silent munching they all huddled down together in the moss and dead leaves between four large beech trees .
Everyone except Lucy went to sleep at once .
Lucy , being far less tired , found it hard to get comfortable .
Also , she had forgotten till now that all Dwarfs snore .
She knew that one of the best ways of getting to sleep is to stop trying , so she opened her eyes .
Through a gap in the bracken and branches she could just see a patch of water in the Creek and the sky above it .
Then , with a thrill of memory , she saw again , after all those years , the bright Narnian stars .
She had once known them better than the stars of our own world , because as a Queen in Narnia she had gone to bed much later than as a child in England .
And there they were -- at least , three of the summer constellations could be seen from where she lay : the Ship , the Hammer , and the Leopard .
" Dear old Leopard , " she murmured happily to herself .
Instead of getting drowsier she was getting more awake -- with an odd , night - time , dreamish kind of wakefulness .
The Creek was growing brighter .
She knew now that the moon was on it , though she could n't see the moon .
And now she began to feel that the whole forest was coming awake like herself .
Hardly knowing why she did it , she got up quickly and walked a little distance away from their bivouac .
" This is lovely , " said Lucy to herself .
It was cool and fresh ; delicious smells were floating everywhere .
Somewhere close by she heard the twitter of a nightingale beginning to sing , then stopping , then beginning again .
It was a little lighter ahead .
She went towards the light and came to a place where there were fewer trees , and whole patches or pools of moonlight , but the moonlight and the shadows so mixed that you could hardly be sure where anything was or what it was .
At the same moment the nightingale , satisfied at last with his tuning up , burst into full song .
Lucy 's eyes began to grow accustomed to the light , and she saw the trees that were nearest her more distinctly .
A great longing for the old days when the trees could talk in Narnia came over her .
She knew exactly how each of these trees would talk if only she could wake them , and what sort of human form it would put on .
She looked at a silver birch : it would have a soft , showery voice and would look like a slender girl , with hair blown all about her face , and fond of dancing .
She looked at the oak : he would be a wizened , but hearty old man with a frizzled beard and warts on his face and hands , and hair growing out of the warts .
She looked at the beech under which she was standing .
Ah !
-- she would be the best of all .
She would be a gracious goddess , smooth and stately , the lady of the wood .
" Oh , Trees , Trees , Trees , " said Lucy ( though she had not been intending to speak at all ) .
" Oh , Trees , wake , wake , wake .
Do n't you remember it ?
Do n't you remember _me_ ?
Dryads and Hamadryads , come out , come to me . "
Though there was not a breath of wind they all stirred about her .
The rustling noise of the leaves was almost like words .
The nightingale stopped singing as if to listen to it .
Lucy felt that at any moment she would begin to understand what the trees were trying to say .
But the moment did not come .
The rustling died away .
The nightingale resumed its song .
Even in the moonlight the wood looked more ordinary again .
Yet Lucy had the feeling ( as you sometimes have when you are trying to remember a name or a date and almost get it , but it vanishes before you really do ) that she had just missed something : as if she had spoken to the trees a split second too soon or a split second too late , or used all the right words except one , or put in one word that was just wrong .
Quite suddenly she began to feel tired .
She went back to the bivouac , snuggled down between Susan and Peter , and was asleep in a few minutes .
It was a cold and cheerless waking for them all next morning , with a grey twilight in the wood ( for the sun had not yet risen ) and everything damp and dirty .
" Apples , heigh - ho , " said Trumpkin with a rueful grin .
" I must say you ancient kings and queens do n't overfeed your courtiers ! "
They stood up and shook themselves and looked about .
The trees were thick and they could see no more than a few yards in any direction .
" I suppose your Majesties know the way all right ? " said the Dwarf .
" I do n't , " said Susan .
" I 've never seen these woods in my life before .
In fact I thought all along that we ought to have gone by the river . "
" Then I think you might have said so at the time , " answered Peter , with pardonable sharpness .
" Oh , do n't take any notice of her , " said Edmund .
" She always is a wet blanket .
You 've got that pocket compass of yours , Peter , have n't you ?
Well , then , we 're as right as rain .
We 've only got to keep on going north - west -- cross that little river , the what - do - you - call - it ?
-- the Rush ---- "
" I know , " said Peter .
" The one that joins the big river at the Fords of Beruna , or Beruna 's Bridge , as the D.L.F. calls it . "
" That 's right .
Cross it and strike uphill , and we 'll be at the Stone Table ( Aslan 's How , I mean ) by eight or nine o'clock .
I hope King Caspian will give us a good breakfast ! "
" I hope you 're right , " said Susan .
" I ca n't remember all that at all . "
" That 's the worst of girls , " said Edmund to Peter and the Dwarf .
" They never can carry a map in their heads . "
" That 's because our heads have something inside them , " said Lucy .
At first things seemed to be going pretty well .
They even thought they had struck an old path ; but if you know anything about woods , you will know that one is always finding imaginary paths .
They disappear after about five minutes and then you think you have found another ( and hope it is not another but more of the same one ) and it also disappears , and after you have been well lured out of your right direction you realise that none of them were paths at all .
The boys and the Dwarf , however , were used to woods and were not taken in for more than a few seconds .
They had plodded on for about half an hour ( three of . them very stiff from yesterday 's rowing ) when Trumpkin suddenly whispered , " Stop . "
They all stopped .
" There 's something following us , " he said in a low voice .
" Or rather , something keeping up with us : over there on the left . "
They all stood still , listening and staring till their ears and eyes ached .
" You and I 'd better each have an arrow on the string , " said Susan to Trumpkin .
The Dwarf nodded , and when both bows were ready for action the party went on again .
They went a few dozen yards through fairly open woodland , keeping a sharp look - out .
Then they came to a place where the undergrowth thickened and they had to pass nearer to it .
Just as they were passing the place , there came a sudden something that snarled and flashed , rising out from the breaking twigs like a thunderbolt .
Lucy was knocked down and winded , hearing the twang of a bowstring as she fell .
When she was able to take notice of things again , she saw a great grim - looking grey bear lying dead with Trumpkin 's arrow in its side .
" The D.L.F. beat you in _that_ shooting match , Su , " said Peter , with a slightly forced smile .
Even he had been shaken by this adventure .
" I -- I left it too late , " said Susan , in an embarrassed voice .
" I was so afraid it might be , you know -- one of our kind of bears , a _talking_ bear . "
She hated killing things .
" That 's the trouble of it , " said Trumpkin , " when most of the beasts have gone enemy and gone dumb , but there are still some of the other kind left .
You never know , and you dare n't wait to see . "
" Poor old Bruin , " said Susan .
" You do n't think he was ? "
" Not he , " said the Dwarf .
" I saw the face and I heard the snarl .
He only wanted Little Girl for his breakfast .
And talking of breakfast , I did n't want to discourage your Majesties when you said you hoped King Caspian would give you a good one : but meat 's precious scarce in camp .
And there 's good eating on a bear .
It would be a shame to leave the carcass without taking a bit , and it wo n't delay us more than half an hour .
I dare say you two youngsters -- Kings , I should say -- know how to skin a bear ? "
" Let 's go and sit down a fair way off , " said Susan to Lucy .
" I know what a horrid messy business _that_ will be . "
Lucy shuddered and nodded .
When they had sat down she said : " Such a horrible idea has come into my head , Su . "
" What 's that ? "
" Would n't it be dreadful if some day , in our own world , at home , men started going wild inside , like the animals here , and still looked like men , so that you 'd never know which were which ? "
" We 've got enough to bother about here and now in Narnia , " said the practical Susan , " without imagining things like that . "
When they rejoined the boys and the Dwarf , as much as they thought they could carry of the best meat had been cut off .
Raw meat is not a nice thing to fill one 's pockets with , but they folded it up in fresh leaves and made the best of it .
They were all experienced enough to know that they would feel quite differently about these squashy and unpleasant parcels when they had walked long enough to be really hungry .
On they trudged again ( stopping to wash three pairs of hands that needed it in the first stream they passed ) until the sun rose and the birds began to sing , and more flies than they wanted were buzzing in the bracken .
The stiffness from yesterday 's rowing began to wear off .
Everybody 's spirits rose .
The sun grew warmer and they took their helmets off and carried them .
" I suppose we are going right ? " said Edmund about an hour later .
" I do n't see how we can go wrong as long as we do n't bear too much to the left , " said Peter .
" If we bear too much to the right , the worst that can happen is wasting a little time by striking the Great River too soon and not cutting off the corner . "
And again they trudged on with no sound except the thud of their feet and the jingle of their chain shirts .
" Where 's this bally Rush got to ? " said Edmund a good deal later .
" I certainly thought we 'd have struck it by now , " said Peter .
" But there 's nothing to do but keep on . "
They both knew that the Dwarf was looking anxiously at them , but he said nothing .
And still they trudged on and their mail shirts began to feel very hot and heavy .
" What on earth ? " said Peter suddenly .
They had come , without seeing it , almost to the edge of a small precipice from which they looked down into a gorge with a river at the bottom .
On the far side the cliffs rose much higher .
None of the party except Edmund ( and perhaps Trumpkin ) was a rock climber .
" I 'm sorry , " said Peter .
" It 's my fault for coming this way .
We 're lost .
I 've never seen this place in my life before . "
The Dwarf gave a low whistle between his teeth .
" Oh , do let 's go back and go the other way , " said Susan .
" I knew all along we 'd get lost in these woods . "
" Susan ! " said Lucy , reproachfully , " do n't nag at Peter like that .
It 's so rotten , and he 's doing all he can . "
" And do n't you snap at Su like that , either , " said Edmund .
" I think she 's quite right . "
" Tubs and tortoiseshells ! " exclaimed Trumpkin .
" If we 've got lost coming , what chance have we of finding our way back ?
And if we 're to go back to the Island and begin all over again -- even supposing we could -- we might as well give the whole thing up .
Miraz will have finished with Caspian before we get there at that rate . "
" You think we ought to go on ? " said Lucy .
" I 'm not sure the High King _is_ lost , " said Trumpkin .
" What 's to hinder this river being the Rush ? "
" Because the Rush is not in a gorge , " said Peter , keeping his temper with some difficulty .
" Your Majesty says _is_ , " replied the Dwarf , " but ought n't you to say _was_ ?
You knew this country hundreds -- it may be a thousand -- years ago .
May n't it have changed ?
A landslide might have pulled off half the side of that hill , leaving bare rock , and there are your precipices beyond the gorge .
Then the Rush might go on deepening its course year after year till you get the little precipices this side .
Or there might have been an earthquake , or anything . "
" I never thought of that , " said Peter .
" And anyway , " continued Trumpkin , " even if this is not the Rush , it 's flowing roughly north and so it must fall into the Great River anyway .
I think I passed something that might have been it , on my way down .
So if we go down - stream , to our right , we 'll hit the Great River .
Perhaps not so high as we 'd hoped , but at least we 'll be no worse off than if you 'd come my way . "
" Trumpkin , you 're a brick , " said Peter .
" Come on , then .
Down this side of the gorge . "
" Look !
Look !
Look ! " cried Lucy .
" Where ?
What ? " asked everyone .
" The Lion , " said Lucy .
" Aslan himself .
Did n't you see ? "
Her face had changed completely and her eyes shone .
" Do you really mean ---- " began Peter .
" Where did you think you saw him ? " asked Susan .
" Do n't talk like a grown - up , " said Lucy , stamping her foot .
" I did n't _think_ I saw him .
I saw him . "
" Where , Lu ? " asked Peter .
" Right up there between those mountain ashes .
No , this side of the gorge .
And up , not down .
Just the opposite of the way you want to go .
And he wanted us to go where he was -- up there . "
" How do you know that was what he wanted ? " asked Edmund .
" He -- I -- I just know , " said Lucy , " by his face . "
The others all looked at each other in puzzled silence .
" Her Majesty may well have seen a lion , " put in Trumpkin .
" There are lions in these woods , I 've been told .
But it need n't have been a friendly and talking lion any more than the bear was a friendly and talking bear . "
" Oh , do n't be so stupid , " said Lucy .
" Do you think I do n't know Aslan when I see him ? "
" He 'd be a pretty elderly lion by now , " said Trumpkin , " if he 's one you knew when you were here before !
And if it could be the same one , what 's to prevent him having gone wild and witless like so many others ? "
Lucy turned crimson and I think she would have flown at Trumpkin , if Peter had not laid his hand on her arm .
" The D.L.F. does n't understand .
How could he ?
You must just take it , Trumpkin , that we do really know about Aslan ; a little bit about him , I mean .
And you must n't talk about him like that again .
It is n't lucky for one thing : and it 's all nonsense for another .
The only question is whether Aslan was really there . "
" But I know he was , " said Lucy , her eyes filling with tears .
" Yes , Lu , but we do n't , you see , " said Peter .
" There 's nothing for it but a vote , " said Edmund .
" All right , " replied Peter .
" You 're the eldest , D.L.F. What do you vote for ?
Up or down ? "
" Down , " said the Dwarf .
" I know nothing about Aslan .
But I do know that if we turn left and follow the gorge up , it might lead us all day before we found a place where we could cross it .
Whereas if we turn right and go down , we 're bound to reach the Great River in about a couple of hours .
And if there are any real lions about , we want to go away from them , not towards them . "
" What do you say , Susan ? "
" Do n't be angry , Lu , " said Susan , " but I do think we should go down .
I 'm dead tired .
Do let 's get out of this wretched wood into the open as quick as we can .
And none of us except you saw _anything_ . "
" Edmund ? " said Peter .
" Well , there 's just this , " said Edmund , speaking quickly and turning a little red .
" When we first discovered Narnia a year ago -- or a thousand years ago , whichever it is -- it was Lucy who discovered it first and none of us would believe her .
I was the worst of the lot , I know .
Yet she was right after all .
Would n't it be fair to believe her this time ?
I vote for going up . "
" Oh , Ed ! " said Lucy and seized his hand .
" And now it 's your turn , Peter , " said Susan , " and I do hope ---- "
" Oh , shut up , shut up and let a chap think , " interrupted Peter .
" I 'd much rather not have to vote . "
" You 're the High King , " said Trumpkin sternly .
" Down , " said Peter after a long pause .
" I know Lucy may be right after all , but I ca n't help it .
We must do one or the other . "
So they set off to their right along the edge , downstream .
And Lucy came last of the party , crying bitterly .