" Ah , there you are , Lucy , " said Caspian .
" We were just waiting for you .
This is my captain , the Lord Drinian . "
A dark - haired man went down on one knee and kissed her hand .
The only others present were Reepicheep and Edmund .
" Where is Eustace ? " asked Lucy .
" In bed , " said Edmund , " and I do n't think we can do anything for him .
It only makes him worse if you try to be nice to him . "
" Meanwhile , " said Caspian , " we want to talk . "
" By Jove , we do , " said Edmund .
" And first , about time .
It 's a year ago by our time since we left you just before your coronation .
How long has it been in Narnia ? "
" Exactly three years , " said Caspian .
" All going well ? " asked Edmund .
" You do n't suppose I 'd have left my kingdom and put to sea unless all was well , " answered the King .
" It could n't be better .
There 's no trouble at all now between Telmarines , Dwarfs , Talking Beasts , Fauns and the rest .
And we gave those troublesome giants on the frontier such a good beating last summer that they pay us tribute now .
And I had an excellent person to leave as Regent while I 'm away -- Trumpkin , the Dwarf .
You remember him ? "
" Dear Trumpkin , " said Lucy , " of course I do .
You could n't have made a better choice . "
" Loyal as a badger , Ma'am , and valiant as -- as a Mouse , " said Drinian .
He had been going to say " as a lion " but had noticed Reepicheep 's eyes fixed on him .
" And where are we heading for ? " asked Edmund .
" Well , " said Caspian , " that 's rather a long story .
Perhaps you remember that when I was a child my usurping uncle Miraz got rid of seven friends of my father 's ( who might have taken my part ) by sending them off to explore the unknown Eastern Seas beyond the Lone Islands . "
" Yes , " said Lucy , " and none of them ever came back . "
" Right .
Well , on my coronation day , with Aslan 's approval , I swore an oath that , if once I established peace in Narnia , I would sail east myself for a year and a day to find my father 's friends or to learn of their deaths and avenge them if I could .
These were their names -- the Lord Revilian , the Lord Bern , the Lord Argoz , the Lord Mavramorn , the Lord Octesian , the Lord Restimar , and -- oh , that other one who 's so hard to remember . "
" The Lord Rhoop , Sire , " said Drinian .
" Rhoop , Rhoop , of course , " said Caspian .
" That is my main intention .
But Reepicheep here has an even higher hope . "
Everyone 's eyes turned to the Mouse .
" As high as my spirit , " it said .
" Though perhaps as small as my stature .
Why should we not come to the very eastern end of the world ?
And what might we find there ?
I expect to find Aslan 's own country .
It is always from the east , across the sea , that the great Lion comes to us . "
" I say , that _is_ an idea , " said Edmund in an awed voice .
" But do you think , " said Lucy , " Aslan 's country would be that sort of country -- I mean , the sort you could ever _sail_ to ? "
" I do not know , Madam , " said Reepicheep .
" But there is this .
When I was in my cradle a wood woman , a Dryad , spoke this verse over me :
" Where sky and water meet , Where the waves grow sweet , Doubt not , Reepicheep , To find all you seek , There is the utter East .
" I do not know what it means .
But the spell of it has been on me all my life . "
After a short silence Lucy asked , " And where are we now , Caspian ? "
" The Captain can tell you better than I , " said Caspian , so Drinian got out his chart and spread it on the table .
" That 's our position , " he said , laying his finger on it .
" Or was at noon to - day .
We had a fair wind from Cair Paravel and stood a little north for Galma , which we made on the next day .
We were in port for a week , for the Duke of Galma made a great tournament for His Majesty and there he unhorsed many knights ---- "
" And got a few nasty falls myself , Drinian .
Some of the bruises are there still , " put in Caspian .
" -- And unhorsed many knights , " repeated Drinian with a grin .
" We thought the Duke would have been pleased if the King 's Majesty would have married his daughter , but nothing came of that ---- "
" Squints , and has freckles , " said Caspian .
" Oh , poor girl , " said Lucy .
" And we sailed from Galma , " continued Drinian , " and ran into a calm for the best of two days and had to row , and then had wind again and did not make Terebinthia till the fourth day from Galma .
And there their King sent out a warning not to land for there was sickness in Terebinthia , but we doubled the cape and put in at a little creek far from the city and watered .
Then we had to lie off for three days before we got a south - east wind and stood out for Seven Isles .
The third day out a pirate ( Terebinthian by her rig ) overhauled us , but when she saw us well armed she stood off after some shooting of arrows on either part ---- "
" And we ought to have given her chase and boarded her and hanged every mother 's son of them , " said Reepicheep .
" -- And in five days more we were in sight of Muil which , as you know , is the westernmost of the Seven Isles .
Then we rowed through the straits and came about sundown into Redhaven on the isle of Brenn , where we were very lovingly feasted and had victual and water at will .
We left Redhaven six days ago and have made marvellously good speed , so that I hope to see the Lone Islands the day after to - morrow .
The sum is , we are now nearly thirty days at sea and have sailed more than four hundred leagues from Narnia . "
" And after the Lone Islands ? " said Lucy .
" No one knows , your Majesty , " answered Drinian .
" Unless the Lone Islanders themselves can tell us . "
" They could n't in our days , " said Edmund .
" Then , " said Reepicheep , " it is after the Lone Islands that the adventure really begins . "
Caspian now suggested that they might like to be shown over the ship before supper , but Lucy 's conscience smote her and she said , " I think I really must go and see Eustace .
Seasickness is horrid , you know .
If I had my old cordial with me I could cure him . "
" But you have , " said Caspian .
" I 'd quite forgotten about it .
As you left it behind I thought it might be regarded as one of the royal treasures and so I brought it -- if you think it ought to be wasted on a thing like seasickness . "
" It 'll only take a drop , " said Lucy .
Caspian opened one of the lockers beneath the bench and brought out the beautiful little diamond flask which Lucy remembered so well .
" Take back your own , Queen , " he said .
They then left the cabin and went out into the sunshine .
In the deck there were two large , long hatches , fore and aft of the mast , and both open , as they always were in fair weather , to let light and air into the belly of the ship .
Caspian led them down a ladder into the after hatch .
Here they found themselves in a place where benches for rowing ran from side to side and the light came in through the oar - holes and danced on the roof .
Of course Caspian 's ship was not that horrible thing , a galley rowed by slaves .
Oars were used only when wind failed or for getting in and out of harbour and everyone ( except Reepicheep whose legs were too short ) had often taken a turn .
At each side of the ship the space under the benches was left clear for the rowers ' feet , but all down the centre there was a kind of pit which went down to the very keel and this was filled with all kinds of things -- sacks of flour , casks of water and beer , barrels of pork , jars of honey , skin bottles of wine , apples , nuts , cheeses , biscuits , turnips , sides of bacon .
From the roof -- that is , from the under side of the deck -- hung hams and strings of onions , and also the men of the watch off - duty in their hammocks .
Caspian led them aft , stepping from bench to bench ; at least , it was stepping for him , and something between a step and a jump for Lucy , and a real long jump for Reepicheep .
In this way they came to a partition with a door in it .
Caspian opened the door and led them into a cabin which filled the stern underneath the deck cabins in the poop .
It was of course not so nice .
It was very low and the sides sloped together as they went down so that there was hardly any floor ; and though it had windows of thick glass , they were not made to open because they were under water .
In fact at this very moment , as the ship pitched they were alternately golden with sunlight and dim green with the sea .
" You and I must lodge here , Edmund , " said Caspian .
" We 'll leave your kinsman the bunk and sling hammocks for ourselves . "
" I beseech your Majesty ---- " said Drinian .
" No , no , shipmate , " said Caspian , " we have argued all that out already .
You and Rhince " ( Rhince was the mate ) " are sailing the ship and will have cares and labours many a night when we are singing catches or telling stories , so you and he must have the port cabin above .
King Edmund and I can lie very snug here below .
But how is the stranger ? "
Eustace , very green in the face , scowled and asked whether there was any sign of the storm getting less .
But Caspian said , " What storm ? " and Drinian burst out laughing .
" Storm , young master ! " he roared .
" This is as fair weather as a man could ask for . "
" Who 's that ? " said Eustace irritably .
" Send him away .
His voice goes through my head . "
" I 've brought you something that will make you feel better , Eustace , " said Lucy .
" Oh , go away and leave me alone , " growled Eustace .
But he took a drop from her flask , and though he said it was beastly stuff ( the smell in the cabin when she opened it was delicious ) it is certain that his face came the right colour a few moments after he had swallowed it , and he must have felt better because , instead of wailing about the storm and his head , he began demanding to be put ashore and said that at the first port he would " lodge a disposition " against them all with the British Consul .
But when Reepicheep asked what a disposition was and how you lodged it ( Reepicheep thought it was some new way of arranging a single combat ) Eustace could only reply , " Fancy not knowing that . "
In the end they succeeded in convincing Eustace that they were already sailing as fast as they could towards the nearest land they knew , and that they had no more power of sending him back to Cambridge -- which was where Uncle Harold lived -- than of sending him to the moon .
After that he sulkily agreed to put on the fresh clothes which had been put out for him and come on deck .
Caspian now showed them over the ship , though indeed they had seen most of it already .
They went up on the forecastle and saw the look - out man standing on a little shelf inside the gilded dragon 's neck and peering through its open mouth .
Inside the forecastle was the galley ( or ship 's kitchen ) and quarters for such people as the boatswain , the carpenter , the cook and the master - archer .
If you think it odd to have the galley in the bows and imagine the smoke from its chimney streaming back over the ship , that is because you are thinking of steamships where there is always a headwind .
On a sailing ship the wind is coming from behind , and anything smelly is put as far forward as possible .
They were taken up to the fighting top , and at first it was rather alarming to rock to and fro there and see the deck looking small and far away beneath .
You realised that if you fell there was no particular reason why you should fall on board rather than in the sea .
Then they were taken to the poop , where Rhince was on duty with another man at the great tiller , and behind that the dragon 's tail rose up , covered with gilding , and round inside it ran a little bench .
The name of the ship was _Dawn Treader_ .
She was only a little bit of a thing compared with one of our ships , or even with the cogs , dromonds , carracks and galleons which Narnia had owned when Lucy and Edmund had reigned there under Peter as the High King , for nearly all navigation had died out in the reigns of Caspian 's ancestors .
When his uncle , Miraz the usurper , had sent the seven lords to sea , they had had to buy a Galmian ship and man it with hired Galmian sailors .
But now Caspian had begun to teach the Narnians to be once more sea - faring folk , and the _Dawn Treader_ was the finest ship he had built yet .
She was so small that , forward of the mast , there was hardly any deck room between the central hatch and the ship 's boat on one side and the hen - coop ( Lucy fed the hens ) on the other .
But she was a beauty of her kind , a " lady " as sailors say , her lines perfect , her colours pure , and every spar and rope and pin lovingly made .
Eustace of course would be pleased with nothing , and kept on boasting about liners and motor - boats and aeroplanes and submarines ( " As if _he_ knew anything about them , " muttered Edmund ) , but the other two were delighted with the _Dawn Treader_ , and when they turned aft to the cabin and supper , and saw the whole western sky lit up with an immense crimson sunset , and felt the quiver of the ship , and tasted the salt on their lips , and thought of unknown lands on the Eastern rim of the world , Lucy felt that she was almost too happy to speak .
What Eustace thought had best be told in his own words , for when they all got their clothes back , dried , next morning , he at once got out a little black notebook and a pencil and started to keep a diary .
He always had this notebook with him and kept a record of his marks in it , for though he did n't care much about any subject for its own sake , he cared a great deal about marks and would even go to people and say , " I got so much .
What did you get ? "
But as he did n't seem likely to get many marks on the _Dawn Treader_ he now started a diary .
This was the first entry .
" _August 7th_ .
Have now been 24 hours on this ghastly boat if it is n't a dream .
All the time a frightful storm has been raging ( it 's a good thing I 'm not seasick ) .
Huge waves keep coming in over the front and I have seen the boat nearly go under any number of times .
All the others pretend to take no notice of this , either from swank or because Harold says one of the most cowardly things ordinary people do is to shut their eyes to Facts .
It 's madness to come out into the sea in a rotten little thing like this .
Not much bigger than a lifeboat .
And , of course , absolutely primitive indoors .
No proper saloon , no radio , no bathrooms , no deck - chairs .
I was dragged all over it yesterday evening and it would make anyone sick to hear Caspian showing off his funny little toy boat as if it was the _Queen Mary_ .
I tried to tell him what real ships are like , but he 's too dense .
E. and L. , _of course_ , did n't back me up .
I suppose a kid like L. does n't realise the danger and E. is buttering up C. as everyone does here .
They call him a King .
I said I was a Republican but he had to ask me what that meant !
He does n't seem to know anything at all .
_Needless to say_ I 've been put in the worst cabin of the boat , a perfect dungeon , and Lucy has been given a whole room on deck to herself , almost a nice room compared with the rest of this place .
C. says that 's because she 's a girl .
I tried to make him see what Alberta says , that all that sort of thing is really lowering girls but he was too dense .
Still , he might see that I shall be ill if I 'm kept in that _hole_ any longer .
E. says we must n't grumble because C. is sharing it with us himself to make room for L. As if that did n't make it more crowded and far worse .
Nearly forgot to say that there is also a kind of Mouse thing that gives everyone the most frightful cheek .
The others can put up with it if they like but I shall twist his tail pretty soon if he tries it on me .
The food is frightful too . "
The trouble between Eustace and Reepicheep arrived even sooner than might have been expected .
Before dinner next day , when the others were sitting round the table waiting ( being at sea gives one a magnificent appetite ) , Eustace came rushing in , wringing his hand and shouting out :
" That little brute has half killed me .
I insist on it being kept under control .
I could bring an action against you , Caspian .
I could order you to have it destroyed . "
At the same moment Reepicheep appeared .
His sword was drawn and his whiskers looked very fierce but he was as polite as ever .
" I ask your pardons all , " he said , " and especially her Majesty 's .
If I had known that he would take refuge here I would have awaited a more reasonable time for his correction . "
" What on earth 's up ? " asked Edmund .
What had really happened was this .
Reepicheep , who never felt that the ship was getting on fast enough , loved to sit on the bulwarks far forward just beside the dragon 's head , gazing out at the eastern horizon and singing softly in his little chirruping voice the song the Dryad had made for him .
He never held on to anything , however the ship pitched , and kept his balance with perfect ease ; perhaps his long tail , hanging down to the deck inside the bulwarks , made this easier .
Everyone on board was familiar with this habit , and the sailors liked it because when one was on look - out duty it gave one somebody to talk to .
Why exactly Eustace had slipped and reeled and stumbled all the way forward to the forecastle ( he had not yet got his sea - legs ) I never heard .
Perhaps he hoped he would see land , or perhaps he wanted to hang about the galley and scrounge something .
Anyway , as soon as he saw that long tail hanging down -- and perhaps it was rather tempting -- he thought it would be delightful to catch hold of it , swing Reepicheep round by it once or twice upside - down , then run away and laugh .
At first the plan seemed to work beautifully .
The Mouse was not much heavier than a very large cat .
Eustace had him off the rail in a trice and very silly he looked ( thought Eustace ) with his little limbs all splayed out and his mouth open .
But unfortunately Reepicheep , who had fought for his life many a time , never lost his head even for a moment .
Nor his skill .
It is not very easy to draw one 's sword when one is swinging round in the air by one 's tail , but he did .
And the next thing Eustace knew was two agonising jabs in his hand which made him let go of the tail ; and the next thing after that was that the Mouse had picked itself up again as if it were a ball bouncing off the deck , and there it was facing him , and a horrid long , bright , sharp thing like a skewer was waving to and fro within an inch of his stomach .
( This does n't count as below the belt for mice in Narnia because they can hardly be expected to reach higher . )
" Stop it , " spluttered Eustace , " go away .
Put that thing away .
It 's not safe .
Stop it , I say .
I 'll tell Caspian .
I 'll have you muzzled and tied up . "
" Why do you not draw your own sword , poltroon ! " cheeped the Mouse .
" Draw and fight or I 'll beat you black and blue with the flat . "
" I have n't got one , " said Eustace .
" I 'm a pacifist .
I do n't believe in fighting . "
" Do I understand , " said Reepicheep , withdrawing his sword for a moment and speaking very sternly , " that you do not intend to give me satisfaction ? "
" I do n't know what you mean , " said Eustace , nursing his hand .
" If you do n't know how to take a joke I sha n't bother my head about you . "
" Then take that , " said Reepicheep , " and that -- to teach you manners -- and the respect due to a knight -- and a Mouse -- and a Mouse 's tail ---- " and at each word he gave Eustace a blow with the side of his rapier , which was thin , fine dwarf - tempered steel and as supple and effective as a birch rod .
Eustace ( of course ) was at a school where they did n't have corporal punishment , so the sensation was quite new to him .
That was why , in spite of having no sea - legs , it took him less than a minute to get off that forecastle and cover the whole length of the deck and burst in at the cabin door -- still hotly pursued by Reepicheep .
Indeed it seemed to Eustace that the rapier as well as the pursuit was hot .
It might have been red - hot by the feel .
There was not much difficulty in settling the matter once Eustace realised that everyone took the idea of a duel quite seriously and heard Caspian offering to lend him a sword , and Drinian and Edmund discussing whether he ought to be handicapped in some way to make up for his being so much bigger than Reepicheep .
He apologised sulkily and went off with Lucy to have his hand bathed and bandaged and then went to his bunk .
He was careful to lie on his side .