After this adventure they sailed on south and a little east for twelve days with a gentle wind , the skies being mostly clear and the air warm , and saw no bird or fish , except that once there were whales spouting a long way to starboard .
Lucy and Reepicheep played a good deal of chess at this time .
Then on the thirteenth day Edmund , from the fighting - top , sighted what looked like a great dark mountain rising out of the sea on their port bow .
They altered course and made for this land , mostly by oar , for the wind would not serve them to sail north - east .
When evening fell they were still a long way from it and rowed all night .
Next morning the weather was fair but a flat calm .
The dark mass lay ahead , much nearer and larger , but still very dim , so that some thought it was still a long way off and others thought they were running into a mist .
About nine that morning , very suddenly , it was so close that they could see that it was not land at all , nor even , in an ordinary sense , a mist .
It was a Darkness .
It is rather hard to describe , but you will see what it was like if you imagine yourself looking into the mouth of a railway tunnel -- a tunnel either so long or so twisty that you can not see the light at the far end .
And you know what it would be like .
For a few feet you would see the rails and sleepers and gravel in broad daylight ; then there would come a place where they were in twilight ; and then , pretty suddenly , but of course without a sharp dividing line , they would vanish altogether into smooth , solid blackness .
It was just so here .
For a few feet in front of their bows they could see the swell of the bright greenish - blue water .
Beyond that , they could see the water looking pale and grey as it would look late in the evening .
But beyond that again , utter blackness as if they had come to the edge of moonless and starless night .
Caspian shouted to the boatswain to keep her back , and all except the rowers rushed forward and gazed from the bows .
But there was nothing to be seen by gazing .
Behind them was the sea and the sun , before them the Darkness .
" Do we go into this ? " asked Caspian at length .
" Not by my advice , " said Drinian .
" The Captain 's right , " said several sailors .
" I almost think he is , " said Edmund .
Lucy and Eustace did n't speak but they felt very glad inside at the turn things seemed to be taking .
But all at once the clear voice of Reepicheep broke in upon the silence .
" And why not ? " he said .
" Will someone explain to me why not . "
No one was anxious to explain , so Reepicheep continued :
" If I were addressing peasants or slaves , " he said , " I might suppose that this suggestion proceeded from cowardice .
But I hope it will never be told in Narnia that a company of noble and royal persons in the flower of their age turned tail because they were afraid of the dark . "
" But what manner of use would it be ploughing through that blackness ? " asked Drinian .
" Use ? " replied Reepicheep .
" Use , Captain ?
If by use you mean filling our bellies or our purses , I confess it will be no use at all .
So far as I know we did not set sail to look for things useful but to seek honour and adventures .
And here is as great an adventure as ever I heard of , and here , if we turn back , no little impeachment of all our honours . "
Several of the sailors said things under their breath that sounded like " Honour be blowed " , but Caspian said :
" Oh , _bother_ you , Reepicheep .
I almost wish we 'd left you at home .
All right !
If you put it that way , I suppose we shall have to go on .
Unless Lucy would rather not ? "
Lucy felt that she would very much rather not , but what she said out loud was , " I 'm game . "
" Your Majesty will at least order lights ? " said Drinian .
" By all means , " said Caspian .
" See to it , Captain . "
So the three lanterns , at the stern , and the prow and the masthead , were all lit , and Drinian ordered two torches amidships .
Pale and feeble they looked in the sunshine .
Then all the men except some who were left below at the oars were ordered on deck and fully armed and posted in their battle stations with swords drawn .
Lucy and two archers were posted on the fighting - top with bows bent and arrows on the string .
Rynelf was in the bows with his line ready to take soundings .
Reepicheep , Edmund , Eustace and Caspian , glittering in mail , were with him .
Drinian took the tiller .
" And now , in Aslan 's name , forward , " cried Caspian .
" A slow , steady stroke .
And let every man be silent and keep his ears open for orders . "
With a creak and a groan the _Dawn Treader_ started to creep forward as the men began to row .
Lucy , up in the fighting - top , had a wonderful view of the exact moment at which they entered the darkness .
The bows had already disappeared before the sunlight had left the stern .
She saw it go .
At one minute the gilded stern , the blue sea , and the sky , were all in broad daylight : next minute the sea and sky had vanished , the stern lantern -- which had been hardly noticeable before -- was the only thing to show where the ship ended .
In front of the lantern she could see the black shape of Drinian crouching at the tiller .
Down below her the two torches made visible two small patches of deck and gleamed on swords and helmets , and forward there was another island of light on the forecastle .
Apart from that the fighting - top , lit by the masthead light which was only just above her , seemed to be a little lighted world of its own floating in lonely darkness .
And the lights themselves , as always happens with lights when you have to have them at the wrong time of day , looked lurid and unnatural .
She also noticed that she was very cold .
How long this voyage into the darkness lasted , nobody knew .
Except for the creak of the rowlocks and the splash of the oars there was nothing to show that they were moving at all .
Edmund , peering from the bows , could see nothing except the reflection of the lantern in the water before him .
It looked a greasy sort of reflection , and the ripple made by their advancing prow appeared to be heavy , small , and lifeless .
As time went on everyone except the rowers began to shiver with cold .
Suddenly , from somewhere -- no one 's sense of direction was very clear by now -- there came a cry , either of some inhuman voice or else a voice of one in such extremity of terror that he had almost lost his humanity .
Caspian was still trying to speak -- his mouth was too dry -- when the shrill voice of Reepicheep , which sounded louder than usual in that silence , was heard .
" Who calls ? " it piped .
" If you are a foe we do not fear you , and if you are a friend your enemies shall be taught the fear of us . "
" Mercy ! " cried the voice .
" Mercy !
Even if you are only one more dream , have mercy .
Take me on board .
Take me , even if you strike me dead .
But in the name of all mercies do not fade away and leave me in this horrible land . "
" Where are you ? " shouted Caspian .
" Come aboard and welcome . "
There came another cry , whether of joy or terror , and then they knew that someone was swimming towards them .
" Stand by to heave him up , men , " said Caspian .
" Aye aye , your Majesty , " said the sailors .
Several crowded to the port bulwark with ropes and one , leaning far out over the side , held the torch .
A wild , white face appeared in the blackness of the water , and then , after some scrambling and pulling , a dozen friendly hands had heaved the stranger on board .
Edmund thought he had never seen a wilder looking man .
Though he did not otherwise look very old , his hair was an untidy mop of white , his face was thin and drawn , and , for clothing , only a few wet rags hung about him .
But what one mainly noticed were his eyes , which were so widely opened that he seemed to have no eyelids at all , and stared as if in an agony of pure fear .
The moment his feet reached the deck he said :
" Fly !
Fly !
About with your ship and fly !
Row , row , row for your lives away from this accursed shore . "
" Compose yourself , " said Reepicheep , " and tell us what the danger is .
We are not used to flying . "
The stranger started horribly at the voice of the Mouse , which he had not noticed before .
" Nevertheless you will fly from here , " he gasped .
" This is the Island where Dreams come true . "
" That 's the island I 've been looking for this long time , " said one of the sailors .
" I reckoned I 'd find I was married to Nancy if we landed here . "
" And I 'd find Tom alive again , " said another .
" Fools ! " said the man , stamping his foot with rage .
" That is the sort of talk that brought me here , and I 'd better have been drowned or never born .
Do you hear what I say ?
This is where dreams -- dreams , do you understand -- come to life , come real .
Not daydreams : dreams . "
There was about half a minute 's silence and then , with a great clatter of armour , the whole crew were tumbling down the main hatch as quick as they could and flinging themselves on the oars to row as they had never rowed before ; and Drinian was swinging round the tiller , and the boatswain was giving out the quickest stroke that had ever been heard at sea .
For it had taken everyone just that half - minute to remember certain dreams they had had -- dreams that make you afraid of going to sleep again -- and to realise what it would mean to land on a country where dreams come true .
Only Reepicheep remained unmoved .
" Your Majesty , your Majesty , " he said , " are you going to tolerate this mutiny , this poltroonery ?
This is a panic , this is a rout . "
" Row , row , " bellowed Caspian .
" Pull for all our lives .
Is her head right , Drinian ?
You can say what you like , Reepicheep .
There are some things no man can face . "
" It is , then , my good fortune not to be a man , " replied Reepicheep with a very stiff bow .
Lucy from up aloft had heard it all .
In an instant that one of her own dreams which she had tried hardest to forget came back to her as vividly as if she had only just woken from it .
So that was what was behind them , on the island , in the darkness !
For a second she wanted to go down to the deck and be with Edmund and Caspian .
But what was the use ?
If dreams began coming true , Edmund and Caspian themselves might turn into something horrible just as she reached them .
She gripped the rail of the fighting - top and tried to steady herself .
They were rowing back to the light as hard as they could : it would be all right in a few seconds .
But oh , if only it could be all right now !
Though the rowing made a good deal of noise it did not quite conceal the total silence which surrounded the ship .
Everyone knew it would be better not to listen , not to strain his ears for any sound from the darkness .
But no one could help listening .
And soon everyone was hearing things .
Each one heard something different .
" Do you hear a noise like ... like a huge pair of scissors opening and shutting ... over there ? "
Eustace asked Rynelf .
" Hush ! " said Rynelf .
" I can hear _them_ crawling up the sides of the ship . "
" _It's_ just going to settle on the mast , " said Caspian .
" Ugh ! " said a sailor .
" There are the gongs beginning .
I knew they would . "
Caspian , trying not to look at anything ( especially not to keep looking behind him ) , went aft to Drinian .
" Drinian , " he said in a very low voice .
" How long did we take rowing in -- I mean rowing to where we picked up the stranger . "
" Five minutes , perhaps , " whispered Drinian .
" Why ? "
" Because we 've been more than that already trying to get out . "
Drinian 's hand shook on the tiller and a line of cold sweat ran down his face .
The same idea was occurring to everyone on board .
" We shall never get out , never get out , " moaned the rowers .
" He 's steering us wrong .
We 're going round and round in circles .
We shall never get out . "
The stranger , who had been lying in a huddled heap on the deck , sat up and burst out into a horrible screaming laugh .
" Never get out ! " he yelled .
" That 's it .
Of course .
We shall never get out .
What a fool I was to have thought they would let me go as easily as that .
No , no , we shall never get out . "
Lucy leant her head on the edge of the fighting - top and whispered , " Aslan , Aslan , if ever you loved us at all , send us help now . "
The darkness did not grow any less , but she began to feel a little -- a very , very little -- better .
" After all , nothing has really happened to us yet , " she thought .
" Look ! " cried Rynelf 's voice hoarsely from the bows .
There was a tiny speck of light ahead , and while they watched a broad beam of light fell from it upon the ship .
It did not alter the surrounding darkness , but the whole ship was lit up as if by a searchlight .
Caspian blinked , stared round , saw the faces of his companions all with wild , fixed expressions .
Everyone was staring in the same direction : behind everyone lay his black , sharply - edged shadow .
Lucy looked along the beam and presently saw something in it .
At first it looked like a cross , then it looked like an aeroplane , then it looked like a kite , and at last with a whirring of wings it was right overhead and was an albatross .
It circled three times round the mast and then perched for an instant on the crest of the gilded dragon at the prow .
It called out in a strong sweet voice what seemed to be words though no one understood them .
After that it spread its wings , rose , and began to fly slowly ahead , bearing a little to starboard .
Drinian steered after it not doubting that it offered good guidance .
But no one except Lucy knew that as it circled the mast it had whispered to her , " Courage , dear heart " , and the voice , she felt sure , was Aslan 's , and with the voice a delicious smell breathed in her face .
In a few moments the darkness turned into a greyness ahead , and then , almost before they dared to begin hoping , they had shot out into the sunlight and were in the warm , blue world again .
And all at once everybody realised that there was nothing to be afraid of and never had been .
They blinked their eyes and looked about them .
The brightness of the ship herself astonished them : they had half expected to find that the darkness would cling to the white and the green and the gold in the form of some grime or scum .
And then first one , and then another , began laughing .
" I reckon we 've made pretty good fools of ourselves , " said Rynelf .
Lucy lost no time in coming down to the deck , where she found the others all gathered round the newcomer .
For a long time he was too happy to speak , and could only gaze at the sea and the sun and feel the bulwarks and the ropes , as if to make sure he was really awake , while tears rolled down his cheeks .
" Thank you , " he said at last .
" You have saved me from ... but I wo n't talk of that .
And now let me know who you are .
I am a Telmarine of Narnia , and when I was worth anything men called me the Lord Rhoop . "
" And I , " said Caspian , " am Caspian , King of Narnia , and I sail to find you and your companions who were my father 's friends . "
Lord Rhoop fell on his knees and kissed the King 's hand .
" Sire , " he said , " you are the man in all the world I most wished to see .
Grant me a boon . "
" What is it ? " asked Caspian .
" Never to bring me back there , " he said .
He pointed astern .
They all looked .
But they saw only bright blue sea and bright blue sky .
The Dark Island and the darkness had vanished for ever .
" Why ! " cried Lord Rhoop .
" You have destroyed it ! "
" I do n't think it was us , " said Lucy .
" Sire , " said Drinian , " this wind is fair for the south - east .
Shall I have our poor fellows up and set sail ?
And after that , every man who can be spared , to his hammock . "
" Yes , " said Caspian , " and let there be grog all round .
Heigh - ho , I feel I could sleep the clock round myself . "
So all afternoon with great joy they sailed south - east with a fair wind .
But nobody noticed when the albatross had disappeared .