And now the winds which had so long been from the north - west began to blow from the west itself and every morning when the sun rose out of the sea the curved prow of the _Dawn Treader_ stood up right across the middle of the sun .
Some thought that the sun looked larger than it looked from Narnia , but others disagreed .
And they sailed and sailed before a gentle yet steady breeze and saw neither fish nor gull nor ship nor shore .
And stores began to get low again , and it crept into their hearts that perhaps they might have come to a sea which went on for ever .
But when the very last day on which they thought they could risk continuing their eastward voyage dawned , it showed , right ahead between them and the sunrise , a low land lying like a cloud .
They made harbour in a wide bay about the middle of the afternoon and landed .
It was a very different country from any they had yet seen .
For when they had crossed the sandy beach they found all silent and empty as if it were an uninhabited land , but before them there were level lawns in which the grass was as smooth and short as it used to be in the grounds of a great English house where ten gardeners were kept .
The trees , of which there were many , all stood well apart from one another , and there were no broken branches and no leaves lying on the ground .
Pigeons sometimes cooed but there was no other noise .
Presently they came to a long , straight , sanded path with not a weed growing on it and trees on either hand .
Far off at the other end of this avenue they now caught sight of a house -- very long and grey and quiet - looking in the afternoon sun .
Almost as soon as they entered this path Lucy noticed that she had a little stone in her shoe .
In that unknown place it might have been wiser for her to ask the others to wait while she took it out .
But she did n't ; she just dropped quietly behind and sat down to take off her shoe .
Her lace had got into a knot .
Before she had undone the knot the others were a fair distance ahead .
By the time she had got the stone out and was putting the shoe on again she could no longer hear them .
But almost at once she heard something else .
It was not coming from the direction of the house .
What she heard was a thumping .
It sounded as if dozens of strong workmen were hitting the ground as hard as they could with great wooden mallets .
And it was very quickly coming nearer .
She was already sitting with her back to a tree , and as the tree was not one she could climb , there was really nothing to do but to sit dead still and press herself against the tree and hope she would n't be seen .
Thump , thump , thump ... and whatever it was must be very close now for she could feel the ground shaking .
But she could see nothing .
She thought the thing -- or things -- must be just behind her .
But then there came a thump on the path right in front of her .
She knew it was on the path not only by the sound but because she saw the sand scatter as if it had been struck a heavy blow .
But she could see nothing that had struck it .
Then all the thumping noises drew together about twenty feet away from her and suddenly ceased .
Then came the Voice .
It was really very dreadful because she could still see nobody at all .
The whole of that park - like country still looked as quiet and empty as it had looked when they first landed .
Nevertheless , only a few feet away from her , a voice spoke .
And what it said was :
" Mates , now 's our chance . "
Instantly a whole chorus of other voices replied , " Hear him .
Hear him .
Now 's our chance , he said .
Well done , Chief .
You never said a truer word . "
" What I say , " continued the first voice , " is , get down to the shore between them and their boat , and let every mother 's son look to his weapons .
Catch 'em when they try to put to sea . "
" Eh , that 's the way , " shouted all the other voices .
" You never made a better plan , Chief .
Keep it up , Chief .
You could n't have a better plan than that . "
" Lively , then , mates , lively , " said the first voice .
" Off we go . "
" Right again , Chief , " said the others .
" Could n't have a better order .
Just what we were going to say ourselves .
Off we go . "
Immediately the thumping began again -- very loud at first but soon fainter and fainter , till it died out in the direction of the sea .
Lucy knew there was no time to sit puzzling as to what these invisible creatures might be .
As soon as the thumping noise had died away she got up and ran along the path after the others as quickly as her legs would carry her .
They must at all costs be warned .
While this had been happening the others had reached the house .
It was a low building -- only two stories high -- made of a beautiful mellow stone , many windowed , and partially covered with ivy .
Everything was so still that Eustace said , " I think it 's empty , " but Caspian silently pointed to the column of smoke which rose from one chimney .
They found a wide gateway open and passed through it into a paved courtyard .
And it was here that they had their first indication that there was something odd about this island .
In the middle of the courtyard stood a pump , and beneath the pump a bucket .
There was nothing odd about that .
But the pump handle was moving up and down , though there seemed to be no one moving it .
" There 's some magic at work here , " said Caspian .
" Machinery ! " said Eustace .
" I do believe we 've come to a civilised country at last . "
At that moment Lucy , hot and breathless , rushed into the courtyard behind them .
In a low voice she tried to make them understand what she had overheard .
And when they had partly understood it even the bravest of them did not look very happy .
" Invisible enemies , " muttered Caspian .
" And cutting us off from the boat .
This is an ugly furrow to plough . "
" You 've no idea what sort of creatures they are , Lu ? " asked Edmund .
" How can I , Ed , when I could n't see them ? "
" Did they sound like humans from their footsteps ? "
" I did n't hear any noise of feet -- only voices and this frightful thudding and thumping -- like a mallet . "
" I wonder , " said Reepicheep , " do they become visible when you drive a sword into them ? "
" It looks as if we shall find out , " said Caspian .
" But let 's get out of this gateway .
There 's one of these gentry at that pump listening to all we say . "
They came out and went back into the path where the trees might possibly make them less conspicuous .
" Not that it 's any good _really_ , " said Eustace , " trying to hide from people you ca n't see .
They may be all round us . "
" Now , Drinian , " said Caspian .
" How would it be if we gave up the boat for lost , went down to another part of the bay , and signalled to the _Dawn Treader_ to stand in and take us aboard ? "
" Not depth for her , Sire , " said Drinian .
" We could swim , " said Lucy .
" Your Majesties all , " said Reepicheep , " hear me .
It is folly to think of avoiding an invisible enemy by any amount of creeping and skulking .
If these creatures mean to bring us to battle , be sure they will succeed .
And whatever comes of it I 'd sooner meet them face to face than be caught by the tail . "
" I really think Reep is in the right this time , " said Edmund .
" Surely , " said Lucy , " if Rhince and the others on the _Dawn Treader_ see us fighting on the shore they 'll be able to do _something_ . "
" But they wo n't see us fighting if they ca n't see any enemy , " said Eustace miserably .
" They 'll think we 're just swinging our swords in the air for fun . "
There was an uncomfortable pause .
" Well , " said Caspian at last , " let 's get on with it .
We must go and face them .
Shake hands all round -- arrow on the string , Lucy -- swords out , everyone else -- and now for it .
Perhaps they 'll parley . "
It was strange to see the lawns and the great trees looking so peaceful as they marched back to the beach .
And when they arrived there , and saw the boat lying where they had left her , and the smooth sand with no one to be seen on it , more than one doubted whether Lucy had not merely imagined all she had told them .
But before they reached the sand , a voice spoke out of the air .
" No further , masters , no further now , " it said .
" We 've got to talk with you first .
There 's fifty of us and more here with weapons in our fists . "
" Hear him , hear him , " came the chorus .
" That 's our Chief .
You can depend on what he says .
He 's telling you the truth , he is . "
" I do not see these fifty warriors , " observed Reepicheep .
" That 's right , that 's right , " said the Chief Voice .
" You do n't see us .
And why not ?
Because we 're invisible . "
" Keep it up , Chief , keep it up , " said the Other Voices .
" You 're talking like a book .
They could n't ask for a better answer than that . "
" Be quiet , Reep , " said Caspian , and then added in a louder voice , " You invisible people , what do you want with us ?
And what have we done to earn your enmity . "
" We want something that little girl can do for us , " said the Chief Voice .
( The others explained that this was just what they would have said themselves . )
" Little girl ! " said Reepicheep .
" The lady is a queen . "
" We do n't know about queens , " said the Chief Voice .
( " No more we do , no more we do , " chimed in the others . )
" But we want something she can do . "
" What is it ? " said Lucy .
" And if it is anything against her Majesty 's honour or safety , " added Reepicheep , " you will wonder to see how many we can kill before we die . "
" Well , " said the Chief Voice .
" It 's a long story .
Suppose we all sit down ? "
The proposal was warmly approved by the other voices but the Narnians remained standing .
" Well , " said the Chief Voice .
" It 's like this .
This island has been the property of a great magician time out of mind .
And we all are -- or perhaps in a manner of speaking , I might say , we were -- his servants .
Well , to cut a long story short , this magician that I was speaking about , he told us to do something we did n't like .
And why not ?
Because we did n't want to .
Well , then , this same magician he fell into a great rage ; for I ought to tell you he owned the island and he was n't used to being crossed .
He was terribly downright , you know .
But let me see , where am I ?
Oh yes , this magician then , he goes upstairs ( for you must know he kept all his magic things up there and we all lived down below ) , I say he goes upstairs and puts a spell on us .
An uglifying spell .
If you saw us now , which in my opinion you may thank your stars you ca n't , you would n't believe what we looked like before we were uglified .
You would n't really .
So there we all were so ugly we could n't bear to look at one another .
So then what did we do ?
Well , I 'll tell you what we did .
We waited till we thought this same magician would be asleep in the afternoon and we creep upstairs and go to his magic book , as bold as brass , to see if we can do anything about this uglification .
But we were all of a sweat and a tremble , so I wo n't deceive you .
But , believe me or believe me not , I do assure you that we could n't find anything in the way of a spell for taking off the ugliness .
And what with time getting on and being afraid that the old gentleman might wake up any minute -- I was all of a muck sweat , so I wo n't deceive you -- well , to cut a long story short , whether we did right or whether we did wrong , in the end we see a spell for making people invisible .
And we thought we 'd rather be invisible than go on being as ugly as all that .
And why ?
Because we 'd like it better .
So my little girl , who 's just about your little girl 's age , and a sweet child she was before she was uglified , though now -- but least said soonest mended -- I say , my little girl she says the spell , for it 's got to be a little girl or else the magician himself , if you see my meaning , for otherwise it wo n't work .
And why not ?
Because nothing happens .
So my Clipsie says the spell , for I ought to have told you she reads beautifully , and there we all were as invisible as you could wish to see .
And I do assure you it was a relief not to see one another 's faces .
At first , anyway .
But the long and the short of it is we 're mortal tired of being invisible .
And there 's another thing .
We never reckoned on this magician ( the one I was telling you about before ) going invisible too .
But we have n't ever seen him since .
So we do n't know if he 's dead , or gone away , or whether he 's just sitting upstairs being invisible , and perhaps coming down and being invisible there .
And , believe me , it 's no manner of use listening because he always did go about with his bare feet on , making no more noise than a great big cat .
And I 'll tell all you gentlemen straight , it 's getting more than what our nerves can stand . "
Such was the Chief Voice 's story , but very much shortened , because I have left out what the other voices said .
Actually he never got out more than six or seven words without being interrupted by their agreements and encouragements , which drove the Narnians nearly out of their minds with impatience .
When it was over there was a very long silence .
" But , " said Lucy at last , " what 's all this got to do with us ?
I do n't understand . "
" Why , bless me , if I have n't gone and left out the whole point , " said the Chief Voice .
" That you have , that you have , " roared the Other Voices with great enthusiasm .
" No one could n't have left it out cleaner and better .
Keep it up , Chief , keep it up . "
" Well , I need n't go over the whole story again , " began the Chief Voice .
" No .
Certainly not , " said Caspian and Edmund .
" Well , then , to put it in a nutshell , " said the Chief Voice , " we 've been waiting for ever so long for a nice little girl from foreign parts , like it might be you , Missie -- that would go upstairs and go to the magic book and find the spell that takes off the invisibleness , and say it .
And we all swore that the first strangers as landed on this island ( having a nice little girl with them , I mean , for if they had n't it 'd be another matter ) we would n't let them go away alive unless they 'd done the needful for us .
And that 's why , gentlemen , if your little girl does n't come up to scratch , it will be our painful duty to cut all your throats .
Merely in the way of business , as you might say , and no offence , I hope . "
" I do n't see all your weapons , " said Reepicheep .
" Are they invisible too ? "
The words were scarcely out of his mouth before they heard a whizzing sound and next moment a spear had stuck , quivering , in one of the trees behind them .
" That 's a spear , that is , " said the Chief Voice .
" That it is , Chief , that it is , " said the others .
" You could n't have put it better . "
" And it came from my hand , " the Chief Voice continued .
" They get visible when they leave us . "
" But why do you want _me_ to do this ? " asked Lucy .
" Why ca n't one of your own people ?
Have n't you got any girls ? "
" We durse n't , we durse n't , " said all the Voices .
" We 're not going upstairs again . "
" In other words , " said Caspian , " you are asking this lady to face some danger which you dare n't ask your own sisters and daughters to face ! "
" That 's right , that 's right , " said all the Voices cheerfully .
" You could n't have said it better .
Eh , you 've had some education , you have .
Anyone can see that . "
" Well , of all the outrageous ---- " began Edmund , but Lucy interrupted .
" Would I have to go upstairs at night , or would it do in daylight ? "
" Oh , daylight , daylight , to be sure , " said the Chief Voice .
" Not at night .
No one 's asking you to do that .
Go upstairs in the dark ?
Ugh . "
" All right , then , I 'll do it , " said Lucy .
" No , " she said , turning to the others , " do n't try to stop me .
Ca n't you see it 's no use ?
There are dozens of them there .
We ca n't fight them .
And the other way there _is_ a chance . "
" But a magician ! " said Caspian .
" I know , " said Lucy .
" But he may n't be as bad as they make out .
Do n't you get the idea that these people are not very brave ? "
" They 're certainly not very clever , " said Eustace .
" Look here , Lu , " said Edmund .
" We really ca n't let you do a thing like this .
Ask Reep , I 'm sure he 'll say just the same . "
" But it 's to save my own life as well as yours , " said Lucy .
" I do n't want to be cut to bits with invisible swords any more than anyone else . "
" Her Majesty is in the right , " said Reepicheep .
" If we had any assurance of saving _her_ by battle , our duty would be very plain .
It appears to me that we have none .
And the service they ask of her is in no way contrary to her Majesty 's honour , but a noble and heroical act .
If the Queen 's heart moves her to risk the magician , I will not speak against it . "
As no one had ever known Reepicheep to be afraid of anything , he could say this without feeling at all awkward .
But the boys who had all been afraid quite often , grew very red .
None the less , it was such obvious sense that they had to give in .
Loud cheers broke from the invisible people when their decision was announced , and the Chief Voice ( warmly supported by all the others ) invited the Narnians to come to supper and spend the night .
Eustace did n't want to accept , but Lucy said , " I 'm sure they 're not treacherous .
They 're not like that at all , " and the others agreed .
And so , accompanied by an enormous noise of thumpings ( which became louder when they reached the flagged and echoing courtyard ) they all went back to the house .