What made Scrubb look so dingy ( and Jill too , if she could only have seen herself ) was the splendour of their surroundings .
I had better describe them at once .
Through a cleft in those mountains which Jill had seen far inland as she approached the land , the sunset light was pouring over a level lawn .
On the far side of the lawn , its weather - vanes glittering in the light , rose a many - towered and many - turreted castle ; the most beautiful castle Jill had ever seen .
On the near side was a quay of white marble and , moored to this , the ship : a tall ship with high forecastle and high poop , gilded and crimson , with a great flag at the mast - head , and many banners waving from the decks , and a row of shields , bright as silver , along the bulwarks .
The gangplank was laid to her , and at the foot of it , just ready to go on board , stood an old , old man .
He wore a rich mantle of scarlet which opened in front to show his silver mail shirt .
There was a thin circlet of gold on his head .
His beard , white as wool , fell nearly to his waist .
He stood straight enough , leaning one hand on the shoulder of a richly dressed lord who seemed younger than himself : but you could see he was very old and frail .
He looked as if a puff of wind could blow him away , and his eyes were watery .
Immediately in front of the King -- who had turned round to speak to his people before going on board the ship -- there was a little chair on wheels , and , harnessed to it , a little donkey : not much bigger than a big retriever .
In this chair sat a fat little dwarf .
He was as richly dressed as the King , but because of his fatness and because he was sitting hunched up among cushions , the effect was quite different : it made him look like a shapeless little bundle of fur and silk and velvet .
He was as old as the King , but more hale and hearty , with very keen eyes .
His bare head , which was bald and extremely large , shone like a gigantic billiard ball in the sunset light .
Farther back , in a half - circle , stood what Jill at once knew to be the courtiers .
They were well worth looking at for their clothes and armour alone .
As far as that went , they looked more like a flower bed than a crowd .
But what really made Jill open her eyes and mouth as wide as they would go , was the people themselves .
If " people " was the right word .
For only about one in every five was human .
The rest were things you never see in our world .
Fauns , satyrs , centaurs : Jill could give a name to these , for she had seen pictures of them .
Dwarfs too .
And there were a lot of animals she knew as well ; bears , badgers , moles , leopards , mice , and various birds .
But then they were so very different from the animals which one called by the same names in England .
Some of them were much bigger -- the mice , for instance , stood on their hind legs and were over two feet high .
But quite apart from that , they all looked different .
You could see by the expression in their faces that they could talk and think just as well as you could .
" Golly ! " thought Jill .
" So it 's true after all . "
But next moment she added , " I wonder are they friendly ? "
For she had just noticed , on the outskirts of the crowd , one or two giants and some people whom she could n't give a name to at all .
At that moment Aslan and the signs rushed back into her mind .
She had forgotten all about them for the last half - hour .
" Scrubb ! " she whispered , grabbing his arm .
" Scrubb , quick !
Do you see anyone you know ? "
" So _you've_ turned up again , have you ? " said Scrubb disagreeably ( for which he had some reason ) .
" Well , keep quiet , ca n't you ?
I want to listen . "
" Do n't be a fool , " said Jill .
" There is n't a moment to lose .
Do n't you see some old friend here ?
Because you 've got to go and speak to him at once . "
" What are you talking about ? " said Scrubb .
" It 's Aslan -- the Lion -- says you 've got to , " said Jill despairingly .
" I 've seen him . "
" Oh , you have , have you ?
What did he say ? "
" He said the very first person you saw in Narnia would be an old friend , and you 'd got to speak to him at once . "
" Well , there 's nobody here I 've ever seen in my life before ; and anyway , I do n't know whether this is Narnia . "
" Thought you said you 'd been here before , " said Jill .
" Well , you thought wrong then . "
" Well , I like that !
You told me ---- "
" For heaven 's sake dry up and let 's hear what they 're saying . "
The King was speaking to the Dwarf , but Jill could n't hear what he said .
And , as far as she could make out , the Dwarf made no answer , though he nodded and wagged his head a great deal .
Then the King raised his voice and addressed the whole court : but his voice was so old and cracked that she could understand very little of his speech -- especially since it was all about people and places she had never heard of .
When the speech was over , the King stooped down and kissed the Dwarf on both cheeks , straightened himself , raised his right hand as if in blessing , and went , slowly and with feeble steps , up the gangway and on board the ship .
The courtiers appeared to be greatly moved by his departure .
Handkerchiefs were got out , sounds of sobbing were heard in every direction .
The gangway was cast off , trumpets sounded from the poop , and the ship moved away from the quay .
( It was being towed by a rowing - boat , but Jill did n't see that . )
" Now ---- " said Scrubb , but he did n't get any further because at that moment a large white object -- Jill thought for a second that it was a kite -- came gliding through the air and alighted at his feet .
It was a white owl , but so big that it stood as high as a good - sized dwarf .
It blinked and peered as if it were short - sighted , and put its head a little on one side , and said in a soft , hooting kind of voice .
" Tu - whoo , tu - whoo !
Who are you two ? "
" My name 's Scrubb , and this is Pole , " said Eustace .
" Would you mind telling us where we are ? "
" In the land of Narnia , at the King 's castle of Cair Paravel . "
" Is that the King who 's just taken ship ? "
" Too true , too true , " said the Owl sadly , shaking its big head .
" But who are you ?
There 's something magic about you two .
I saw you arrive : you _flew_ .
Everyone else was so busy seeing the King off that nobody knew .
Except me .
I happened to notice you , you flew . "
" We were sent here by Aslan , " said Eustace in a low voice .
" Tu - whoo , tu - whoo ! " said the Owl , ruffling out its feathers .
" This is almost too much for me , so early in the evening .
I 'm not quite myself till the sun 's down . "
" And we 've been sent to find the lost Prince , " said Jill , who had been anxiously waiting to get into the conversation .
" It 's the first I 've heard about it , " said Eustace .
" What prince ? "
" You had better come and speak to the Lord Regent at once , " it said .
" That 's him , over there in the donkey carriage ; Trumpkin the Dwarf . "
The bird turned and began leading the way , muttering to itself , " Whoo !
Tu - whoo !
What a to - do !
I ca n't think clearly yet .
It 's too early . "
" What is the King 's name ? " asked Eustace .
" Caspian the Tenth , " said the Owl .
And Jill wondered why Scrubb had suddenly pulled up short in his walk and turned an extraordinary colour .
She thought she had never seen him look so sick about anything .
But before she had time to ask any questions they had reached the Dwarf , who was just gathering up the reins of his donkey and preparing to drive back to the castle .
The crowd of courtiers had broken up and were going in the same direction , by ones and twos and little knots , like people coming away from watching a game or a race .
" Tu - whoo !
Ahem !
Lord Regent , " said the Owl , stooping down a little and holding its beak near the Dwarf 's ear .
" Heh ?
What 's that ? " said the Dwarf .
" Two strangers , my lord , " said the Owl .
" Rangers !
What d' ye mean ? " said the Dwarf .
" I see two uncommonly grubby man - cubs .
What do they want ? "
" My name 's Jill , " said Jill , pressing forward .
She was very eager to explain the important business on which they had come .
" The girl 's called Jill , " said the Owl , as loud as it could .
" What 's that ? " said the Dwarf .
" The girls are all killed !
I do n't believe a word of it .
What girls ?
Who killed 'em ? "
" Only one girl , my lord , " said the Owl .
" Her name is Jill . "
" Speak up , speak up , " said the Dwarf .
" Do n't stand there buzzing and twittering in my ear .
Who 's been killed ? "
" Nobody 's been killed , " hooted the Owl .
" Who ? "
" NOBODY . "
" All right , all right .
You need n't shout .
I 'm not so deaf as all that .
What do you mean by coming here to tell me that nobody 's been killed ?
Why should anyone have been killed ? "
" Better tell him I 'm Eustace , " said Scrubb .
" The boy 's Eustace , my lord , " hooted the Owl as loud as it could .
" Useless ? " said the Dwarf irritably .
" I dare say he is .
Is that any reason for bringing him to court ?
Hey ? "
" Not useless , " said the Owl .
" EUSTACE . "
" Used to it , is he ?
I do n't know what you 're talking about , I 'm sure .
I tell you what it is , Master Glimfeather ; when I was a young Dwarf there used to be _talking_ beasts and birds in this country who really could talk .
There was n't all this mumbling and muttering and whispering .
It would n't have been tolerated for a moment .
Not for a moment , Sir .
Urnus , my trumpet please ---- "
A little Faun who had been standing quietly beside the Dwarf 's elbow all this time now handed him a silver ear - trumpet .
It was made like the musical instrument called a serpent , so that the tube curled right round the Dwarf 's neck .
While he was getting it settled the Owl , Glimfeather , suddenly said to the children in a whisper :
" My brain 's a bit clearer now .
Do n't say anything about the lost Prince .
I 'll explain later .
It would n't do , would n't do , Tu - Whoo !
Oh _what_ a to - do ! "
" Now , " said the Dwarf , " if you _have_ anything sensible to say , Master Glimfeather , try and say it .
Take a deep breath and do n't attempt to speak too quickly . "
With help from the children , and in spite of a fit of coughing on the part of the Dwarf , Glimfeather explained that the strangers had been sent by Aslan to visit the court of Narnia .
The Dwarf glanced quickly up at them with a new expression in his eyes .
" Sent by the Lion Himself , hey ? " he said .
" And from -- m 'm -- from that other Place -- beyond the world 's end , hey ? "
" Yes , my lord , " bawled Eustace into the trumpet .
" Son of Adam and daughter of Eve , hey ? " said the Dwarf .
But people at Experiment House have n't heard of Adam and Eve , so Jill and Eustace could n't answer this .
But the Dwarf did n't seem to notice .
" Well , my dears , " he said , taking first one and then the other by the hand and bowing his head a little .
" You are very heartily welcome .
If the good King , my poor Master , had not this very hour set sail for Seven Isles , he would have been glad of your coming .
It would have brought back his youth to him for a moment -- for a moment .
And now , it is high time for supper .
You shall tell me your business in full council to - morrow morning .
Master Glimfeather , see that bedchambers and suitable clothes and all else are provided for these guests in the most honourable fashion .
And -- Glimfeather -- in your ear ---- "
Here the Dwarf put his mouth close to the Owl 's head and , no doubt , intended to whisper : but , like other deaf people , he was n't a very good judge of his own voice , and both children heard him say , " See that they 're properly washed . "
After that , the Dwarf touched up his donkey and it set off towards the castle at something between a trot and a waddle ( it was a very fat little beast ) while the Faun , the Owl , and the children followed at a rather slower pace .
The sun had set and the air was growing cool .
They went across the lawn and then through an orchard and so to the North Gate of Cair Paravel , which stood wide open .
Inside , they found a grassy courtyard .
Lights were already showing from the windows of the great hall on their right and from a more complicated mass of buildings straight ahead .
Into these the Owl led them , and there a most delightful person was called to look after Jill .
She was not much taller than Jill herself , and a good deal slenderer , but obviously full grown , graceful as a willow , and her hair was willowy too , and there seemed to be moss in it .
She brought Jill to a round room in one of the turrets , where there was a little bath sunk in the floor and a fire of sweet - smelling woods burning on the flat hearth and a lamp hanging by a silver chain from the vaulted roof .
The window looked west into the strange land of Narnia , and Jill saw the red remains of the sunset still glowing behind distant mountains .
It made her long for more adventures and feel sure that this was only the beginning .
When she had had her bath , and brushed her hair , and put on the clothes that had been laid out for her -- they were the kind that not only felt nice , but looked nice and smelled nice and made nice sounds when you moved as well -- she would have gone back to gaze out of that exciting window , but she was interrupted by a bang on the door .
" Come in , " said Jill .
And in came Scrubb , also bathed and splendidly dressed in Narnian clothes .
But his face did n't look as if he were enjoying it .
" Oh , here you are at last , " he said crossly , flinging himself into a chair .
" I 've been trying to find you for ever so long . "
" Well , now you have , " said Jill .
" I say , Scrubb , is n't it all simply too exciting and scrumptious for words . "
She had forgotten all about the signs and the lost Prince for the moment .
" Oh !
That 's what you think , is it ? " said Scrubb : and then , after a pause , " I wish to goodness we 'd never come . "
" Why on earth ? "
" I ca n't bear it , " said Scrubb .
" Seeing the King -- Caspian -- a doddering old man like that .
It 's -- it 's frightful . "
" Why , what harm does it do you ? "
" Oh , you do n't understand .
Now that I come to think of it , you could n't .
I did n't tell you that this world has a different time from ours . "
" How do you mean ? "
" The time you spend here does n't take up any of our time .
Do you see ?
I mean , however long we spend here , we shall still get back to Experiment House at the moment we left it ---- "
" That wo n't be much fun ---- "
" Oh , dry up !
Do n't keep interrupting .
And when you 're back in England -- in our world -- you ca n't tell how time is going here .
It might be any number of years in Narnia while we 're having one year at home .
The Pevensies explained it all to me , but , like a fool , I forgot about it .
And now apparently it 's been about seventy years -- Narnian years -- since I was here last .
Do you see now ?
And I come back and find Caspian an old , old man . "
" Then the King _was_ an old friend of yours ! " said Jill .
A horrid thought had struck her .
" I should jolly well think he was , " said Scrubb miserably .
" About as good a friend as a chap could have .
And last time he was only a few years older than me .
And to see that old man with a white beard , and to remember Caspian as he was the morning we captured the Lone Islands , or in the fight with the Sea Serpent -- oh , it 's frightful .
It 's worse than coming back and finding him dead . "
" Oh , shut up , " said Jill impatiently .
" It 's far worse than you think .
We 've muffed the first Sign . "
Of course Scrubb did not understand this .
Then Jill told him about her conversation with Aslan and the four signs and the task of finding the lost prince which had been laid upon them .
" So you see , " she wound up , " you did see an old friend , just as Aslan said , and you ought to have gone and spoken to him at once .
And now you have n't , and everything is going wrong from the very beginning . "
" But how was I to know ? " said Scrubb .
" If you 'd only listened to me when I tried to tell you , we 'd be all right , " said Jill .
" Yes , and if you had n't played the fool on the edge of that cliff and jolly nearly murdered me -- all right , I said _murder_ , and I 'll say it again as often as I like , so keep your hair on -- we 'd have come together and both known what to do . "
" I suppose he _was_ the very first person you saw ? " said Jill .
" You must have been here hours before me .
Are you sure you did n't see anyone else first ? "
" I was only here about a minute before you , " said Scrubb .
" He must have blown you quicker than me .
Making up for lost time : the time _you_ lost . "
" Do n't be a perfect beast , Scrubb , " said Jill .
" Hallo !
What 's that ? "
It was the castle bell ringing for supper , and thus what looked like turning into a first - rate quarrel was happily cut short .
Both had a good appetite by this time .
Supper in the great hall of the castle was the most splendid thing either of them had ever seen ; for though Eustace had been in that world before , he had spent his whole visit at sea and knew nothing of the glory and courtesy of the Narnians at home in their own land .
The banners hung from the roof , and each course came in with trumpeters and kettledrums .
There were soups that would make your mouth water to think of , and the lovely fishes called pavenders , and venison and peacock and pies , and ices and jellies and fruit and nuts , and all manner of wines and fruit drinks .
Even Eustace cheered up and admitted that it was " something like " .
And when all the serious eating and drinking was over , a blind poet came forward and struck up the grand old tale of Prince Cor and Aravis and the horse Bree , which is called _The Horse and his Boy_ and tells of an adventure that happened in Narnia and Calormen and the lands between , in the Golden Age when Peter was High King in Cair Paravel .
( I have n't time to tell it now , though it is well worth hearing . )
When they were dragging themselves upstairs to bed , yawning their heads off , Jill said , " I bet we sleep well , to - night " ; for it had been a full day .
Which just shows how little anyone knows what is going to happen to them next .