" Was it all a dream ? " wondered Shasta .
But it could n't have been a dream for there in the grass before him he saw the deep , large print of the Lion 's front right paw .
It took one 's breath away to think of the weight that could make a footprint like that .
But there was something more remarkable than the size about it .
As he looked at it , water had already filled the bottom of it .
Soon it was full to the brim , and then overflowing , and a little stream was running downhill , past him , over the grass .
Shasta stooped and drank -- a very long drink -- and then dipped his face in and splashed his head .
It was extremely cold , and clear as glass , and refreshed him very much .
After that he stood up , shaking the water out of his ears and flinging the wet hair back from his forehead , and began to take stock of his surroundings .
Apparently it was still very early morning .
The sun had only just risen , and it had risen out of the forests which he saw low down and far away on his right .
The country which he was looking at was absolutely new to him .
It was a green valley - land dotted with trees through which he caught the gleam of a river that wound away roughly to the north - west .
On the far side of the valley there were high and even rocky hills , but they were lower than the mountains he had seen yesterday .
Then he began to guess where he was .
He turned and looked behind him and saw that the slope on which he was standing belonged to a range of far higher mountains .
" I see , " said Shasta to himself .
" Those are the big mountains between Archenland and Narnia .
I was on the other side of them yesterday .
I must have come through the pass in the night .
What luck that I hit it !
-- at least it was n't luck at all really , it was _Him_ .
And now I 'm in Narnia . "
He turned and unsaddled his horse and took off its bridle -- " Though you _are_ a perfectly horrid horse , " he said .
It took no notice of this remark and immediately began eating grass .
That horse had a very low opinion of Shasta .
" I wish I could eat grass ! " thought Shasta .
" It 's no good going back to Anvard , it 'll all be besieged .
I 'd better get lower down into the valley and see if I can get anything to eat . "
So he went on downhill ( the thick dew was cruelly cold to his bare feet ) till he came into a wood .
There was a kind of track running through it and he had not followed this for many minutes when he heard a thick and rather wheezy voice saying to him ,
" Good morning , neighbour . "
Shasta looked round eagerly to find the speaker and presently saw a small , prickly person with a dark face who had just come out from among the trees .
At least , it was small for a person but very big indeed for a hedgehog , which was what it was .
" Good morning , " said Shasta .
" But I 'm not a neighbour .
In fact I 'm a stranger in these parts . "
" Ah ? " said the Hedgehog inquiringly .
" I 've come over the mountains -- from Archenland , you know . "
" Ah , Archenland , " said the Hedgehog .
" That 's a terrible long way .
Never been there myself . "
" And I think , perhaps , " said Shasta , " someone ought to be told that there 's an army of savage Calormenes attacking Anvard at this very moment . "
" You do n't say so ! " answered the Hedgehog .
" Well , think of that .
And they do say that Calormen is hundreds and thousands of miles away , right at the world 's end , across a great sea of sand . "
" It 's not nearly as far as you think , " said Shasta .
" And ought n't something to be done about this attack on Anvard .
Ought n't your High King to be told ? "
" Certain sure , something ought to be done about it , " said the Hedgehog .
" But you see I 'm just on my way to bed for a good day 's sleep .
Hullo , neighbour ! "
The last words were addressed to an immense biscuit - coloured rabbit whose head had just popped up from somewhere beside the path .
The Hedgehog immediately told the Rabbit what it had just learned from Shasta .
The Rabbit agreed that this was very remarkable news and that somebody ought to tell someone about it with a view to doing something .
And so it went on .
Every few minutes they were joined by other creatures , some from the branches overhead and some from little underground houses at their feet , till the party consisted of five rabbits , a squirrel , two magpies , a goat - foot faun , and a mouse , who all talked at the same time and all agreed with the Hedgehog .
For the truth was that in that golden age when the Witch and the Winter had gone and Peter the High King ruled at Cair Paravel , the smaller woodland people of Narnia were so safe and happy that they were getting a little careless .
Presently , however , two more practical people arrived in the little wood .
One was a Red Dwarf whose name appeared to be Duffle .
The other was a stag , a beautiful lordly creature with wide liquid eyes , dappled flanks and legs so thin and graceful that they looked as if you could break them with two fingers .
" Lion alive ! " roared the Dwarf as soon as he had heard the news .
" And if that 's so , why are we all standing still , chattering ?
Enemies at Anvard !
News must be sent to Cair Paravel at once .
The army must be called out .
Narnia must go to the aid of King Lune . "
" Ah ! " said the Hedgehog .
" But you wo n't find the High King at the Cair .
He 's away to the North trouncing those giants .
And talking of giants , neighbours , that puts me in mind --
" Who 'll take our message ? " interrupted the Dwarf .
" Anyone here got more speed than me ? "
" I 've got speed , " said the Stag .
" What 's my message ?
How many Calormenes ? "
" Two hundred : under Prince Rabadash .
And ---- "
But the Stag was already away -- all four legs off the ground at once , and in a moment its white stern had disappeared among the remoter trees .
" Wonder where he 's going , " said a Rabbit .
" He wo n't find the High King at Cair Paravel , you know . "
" He 'll find Queen Lucy , " said Duffle .
" And then -- hullo !
What 's wrong with the Human ?
It looks pretty green .
Why , I do believe it 's quite faint .
Perhaps it 's mortal hungry .
When did you last have a meal , youngster ? "
" Yesterday morning , " said Shasta weakly .
" Come on , then , come on , " said the Dwarf , at once throwing his thick little arms round Shasta 's waist to support him .
" Why , neighbours , we ought all to be ashamed of ourselves !
You come with me , lad .
Breakfast ! better than talking . "
With a great deal of bustle , muttering reproaches to itself , the Dwarf half led and half supported Shasta at a great speed further into the wood and a little downhill .
It was a longer walk than Shasta wanted at that moment and his legs had begun to feel very shaky before they came out from the trees onto bare hillside .
There they found a little house with a smoking chimney and an open door , and as they came to the doorway Duffle called out ,
" Hey , brothers !
A visitor for breakfast . "
And immediately , mixed with a sizzling sound , there came to Shasta a simply delightful smell .
It was one he had never smelled in his life before , but I hope you have .
It was , in fact , the smell of bacon and eggs and mushrooms all frying in a pan .
" Mind your head , lad , " said Duffle a moment too late , for Shasta had already bashed his forehead against the low lintel of the door .
" Now , " continued the Dwarf , " sit you down .
The table 's a bit low for you , but then the stool 's low too .
That 's right .
And here 's porridge -- and here 's a jug of cream -- and here 's a spoon . "
By the time Shasta had finished his porridge , the Dwarf 's two brothers ( whose names were Rogin and Bricklethumb ) were putting the dish of bacon and eggs and mushrooms , and the coffee pot and the hot milk , and the toast , on the table .
It was all new and wonderful to Shasta for Calormene food is quite different .
He did n't even know what the slices of brown stuff were , for he had never seen toast before .
He did n't know what the yellow soft thing they smeared on the toast was , because in Calormen you nearly always get oil instead of butter .
And the house itself was quite different from the dark , frowsty , fish - smelling hut of Arsheesh and from the pillared and carpeted halls in the palaces of Tashbaan .
The roof was very low , and everything was made of wood and there was a cuckoo - clock and a red - and - white checked table - cloth and a bowl of wild flowers and little white curtains on the thick - paned windows .
It was also rather troublesome having to use dwarf cups and plates and knives and forks .
This meant that helpings were very small , but then there were a great many helpings , so that Shasta 's plate or cup was being filled every moment , and every moment the Dwarfs themselves were saying , " Butter please , " or " Another cup of coffee , " or " I 'd like a few more mushrooms , " or " What about frying another egg or so ? "
And when at last they had all eaten as much as they possibly could the three Dwarfs drew lots for who would do the washing - up , and Rogin was the unlucky one .
Then Duffle and Bricklethumb took Shasta outside to a bench which ran against the cottage wall , and they all stretched out their legs and gave a great sigh of contentment and the two Dwarfs lit their pipes .
The dew was off the grass now and the sun was warm ; indeed , if there had n't been a light breeze , it would have been too hot .
" Now , Stranger , " said Duffle , " I 'll show you the lie of the land .
You can see nearly all South Narnia from here , and we 're rather proud of the view .
Right away on your left , beyond those near hills , you can just see the Western Mountains .
And that round hill away on your right is called the Hill of the Stone Table .
Just beyond ---- "
But at that moment he was interrupted by a snore from Shasta who , what with his night 's journey and his excellent breakfast , had gone fast asleep .
The kindly Dwarfs , as soon as they noticed this , began making signs to each other not to wake him , and indeed did so much whispering and nodding and getting up and tiptoeing away that they certainly would have waked him if he had been less tired .
He slept pretty well nearly all day but woke up in time for supper .
The beds in that house were all too small for him but they made him a fine bed of heather on the floor , and he never stirred nor dreamed all night .
Next morning they had just finished breakfast when they heard a shrill , exciting sound from outside .
" Trumpets ! " said all the Dwarfs , as they and Shasta all came running out .
The trumpets sounded again : a new noise to Shasta , not huge and solemn like the horns of Tashbaan nor gay and merry like King Lune 's hunting horn , but clear and sharp and valiant .
The noise was coming from the woods to the East , and soon there was a noise of horse - hoofs mixed with it .
A moment later the head of the column came into sight .
First came the Lord Peridan on a bay horse carrying the great banner of Narnia --- a red lion on a green ground .
Shasta knew him at once .
Then came three people riding abreast , two on great chargers and one on a pony .
The two on the chargers were King Edmund and a fair - haired lady with a very merry face who wore a helmet and mail shirt and carried a bow across her shoulder and a quiver full of arrows at her side .
( " The Queen Lucy , " whispered Duffle . )
But the one on the pony was Corin .
After that came the main body of the army : men on ordinary horses , men on Talking Horses ( who did n't mind being ridden on proper occasions , as when Narnia went to war ) , centaurs , stern , hard - bitten bears , great Talking Dogs , and last of all six giants .
For there are good giants in Narnia .
But though he knew they were on the right side Shasta at first could hardly bear to look at them ; there are some things that take a lot of getting used to .
Just as the King and Queen reached the cottage and the Dwarfs began making low bows to them , King Edmund called out ,
" Now , friends !
Time for a halt and a morsel ! " and at once there was a great bustle of people dismounting and haversacks being opened and conversation beginning when Corin came running up to Shasta and seized both his hands and cried ,
" What !
_You_ here !
So you got through all right ?
I am glad .
Now we shall have some sport .
And is n't it luck !
We only got into harbour at Cair Paravel yesterday morning and the very first person who met us was Chervy the Stag with all this news of an attack on Anvard .
Do n't you think --
" Who is your Highness 's friend ? " said King Edmund who had just got off his horse .
" Do n't you see , Sire ? " said Corin .
" It 's my double : the boy you mistook me for at Tashbaan . "
" Why , so he is your double , " exclaimed Queen Lucy .
" As like as two twins .
This is a marvellous thing . "
" Please , your Majesty , " said Shasta to King Edmund , " I was no traitor , really I was n't .
And I could n't help hearing your plans .
But I 'd never have dreamed of telling them to your enemies . "
" I know now that you were no traitor , boy , " said King Edmund , laying his hand on Shasta 's head .
" But if you would not be taken for one , another time try not to hear what 's meant for other ears .
But all 's well . "
After that there was so much bustle and talk and coming and going that Shasta for a few minutes lost sight of Corin and Edmund and Lucy .
But Corin was the sort of boy whom one is sure to hear of pretty soon and it was n't very long before Shasta heard King Edmund saying in a loud voice :
" By the Lion 's Mane , prince , this is too much !
Will your Highness never be better ?
You are more of a heart 's - scald than our whole army together !
I 'd as lief have a regiment of hornets in my command as you . "
Shasta wormed his way through the crowd and there saw Edmund , looking very angry indeed , Corin looking a little ashamed of himself , and a strange Dwarf sitting on the ground making faces .
A couple of fauns had apparently just been helping it out of its armour .
" If I had but my cordial with me , " Queen Lucy was saying , " I could soon mend this .
But the High King has so strictly charged me not to carry it commonly to the wars and to keep it only for great extremities ! "
What had happened was this .
As soon as Corin had spoken to Shasta , Corin 's elbow had been plucked by a Dwarf in the army called Thornbut .
" What is it , Thornbut ? "
Corin had said .
" Your Royal Highness , " said Thornbut , drawing him aside , " our march to - day will bring us through the pass and right to your royal father 's castle .
We may be in battle before night . "
" I know , " said Corin .
" Is n't it splendid ! "
" Splendid or not , " said Thornbut , " I have the strictest orders from King Edmund to see to it that your Highness is not in the fight .
You will be allowed to see it , and that 's treat enough for your Highness 's little years . "
" Oh what nonsense ! "
Corin burst out .
" Of course I 'm going to fight .
Why , the Queen Lucy 's going to be with the archers . "
" The Queen 's grace will do as she pleases , " said Thornbut .
" But you are in my charge .
Either I must have your solemn and princely word that you 'll keep your pony beside mine -- not half a neck ahead -- till I give your Highness leave to depart : or else -- it is his Majesty 's word -- we must go with our wrists tied together like two prisoners . "
" I 'll knock you down if you try to bind me , " said Corin .
" I 'd like to see your Highness do it , " said the Dwarf .
That was quite enough for a boy like Corin and in a second he and the Dwarf were at it hammer and tongs .
It would have been an even match for , though Corin had longer arms and more height , the Dwarf was older and tougher .
But it was never fought out ( that 's the worst of fights on a rough hillside ) for by very bad luck Thornbut trod on a loose stone , came flat down on his nose , and found when he tried to get up that he had sprained his ankle : a real excruciating sprain which would keep him from walking or riding for at least a fortnight .
" See what your Highness has done , " said King Edmund .
" Deprived us of a proved warrior on the very edge of battle . "
" I 'll take his place , Sire , " said Corin .
" Pshaw , " said Edmund .
" No - one doubts your courage .
But a boy in battle is a danger only to his own side . "
At that moment the King was called away to attend to something else , and Corin , after apologising handsomely to the Dwarf , rushed up to Shasta and whispered ,
" Quick .
There 's a spare pony now , and the Dwarf 's armour .
Put it on before anyone notices . "
" What for ? " said Shasta .
" Why , so that you and I can fight in the battle of course !
Do n't you want to ? "
" Oh -- ah , yes , of course , " said Shasta .
But he had n't been thinking of doing so at all , and began to get a most uncomfortable prickly feeling in his spine .
" That 's right , " said Corin .
" Over your head .
Now the sword - belt .
But we must ride near the tail of the column and keep as quiet as mice .
Once the battle begins every one will be far too busy to notice us . "