The next turn of the road brought them out from among the trees and there , across green lawns , sheltered from the north wind by the high wooded ridge at its back , they saw the castle of Anvard .
It was very old and built of a warm , reddish - brown stone .
Before they had reached the gate King Lune came out to meet them , not looking at all like Aravis 's idea of a king and wearing the oldest of old clothes ; for he had just come from making a round of the kennels with his Huntsman and had only stopped for a moment to wash his doggy hands .
But the bow with which he greeted Aravis as he took her hand would have been stately enough for an Emperor .
" Little lady , " he said , " we bid you very heartily welcome .
If my dear wife were still alive we could make you better cheer but could not do it with a better will .
And I am sorry that you have had misfortunes and been driven from your father 's house , which can not but be a grief to you .
My son Cor has told me about your adventures together and all your valour . "
" It was he who did all that , Sir , " said Aravis .
" Why , he rushed at a lion to save me . "
" Eh , what 's that ? " said King Lune , his face brightening .
" I have n't heard that part of the story . "
Then Aravis told it .
And Cor , who had very much wanted the story to be known , though he felt he could n't tell it himself , did n't enjoy it so much as he had expected , and indeed felt rather foolish .
But his father enjoyed it very much indeed and in the course of the next few weeks told it to so many people that Cor wished it had never happened .
Then the King turned to Hwin and Bree and was just as polite to them as to Aravis , and asked them a lot of questions about their families and where they had lived in Narnia before they had been captured .
The Horses were rather tongue - tied for they were n't yet used to being talked to as equals by Humans -- grown - up Humans , that is .
They did n't mind Aravis and Cor.
Presently Queen Lucy came out from the castle and joined them and King Lune said to Aravis , " My dear , here is a loving friend of our house , and she has been seeing that your apartments are put to rights for you better than I could have done it . "
" You 'd like to come and see them , would n't you ? " said Lucy , kissing Aravis .
They liked each other at once and soon went away together to talk about Aravis 's bedroom and Aravis 's boudoir and about getting clothes for her , and all the sort of things girls do talk about on such an occasion .
After lunch , which they had on the terrace ( it was cold birds and cold game pie and wine and bread and cheese ) , King Lune ruffled up his brow and heaved a sigh and said , " Heigh - ho !
We have still that sorry creature Rabadash on our hands , my friends , and must needs resolve what to do with him . "
Lucy was sitting on the King 's right and Aravis on his left .
King Edmund sat at one end of the table and the Lord Darrin faced him at the other .
Dar and Peridan and Cor and Corin were on the same side as the King .
" Your Majesty would have a perfect right to strike off his head , " said Peridan .
" Such an assault as he made puts him on a level with assassins . "
" It is very true , " said Edmund .
" But even a traitor may mend .
I have known one that did . "
And he looked very thoughtful .
" To kill this Rabadash would go near to raising war with the Tisroc , " said Darrin .
" A fig for the Tisroc , " said King Lune .
" His strength is in numbers and numbers will never cross the desert .
But I have no stomach for killing men ( even traitors ) in cold blood .
To have cut his throat in the battle would have eased my heart mightily : but this is a different thing . "
" By my counsel , " said Lucy , " your Majesty shall give him another trial .
Let him go free on strait promise of fair dealing in the future .
It may be that he will keep his word . "
" Maybe Apes will grow honest , Sister , " said Edmund .
" But , by the Lion , if he breaks it again , it may be in such time and place that any of us could swap off his head in clean battle . "
" It shall be tried , " said the King : and then to one of the attendants , " Send for the prisoner , friend . "
Rabadash was brought before them in chains .
To look at him anyone would have supposed that he had passed the night in a noisome dungeon without food or water ; but in reality he had been shut up in quite a comfortable room and provided with an excellent supper .
But as he was sulking far too furiously to touch the supper and had spent the whole night stamping and roaring and cursing , he naturally did not now look his best .
" Your royal Highness needs not to be told , " said King Lune , " that by the law of nations as well as by all reasons , of prudent policy , we have as good right to your head as ever one mortal man had against another .
Nevertheless , in consideration of your youth and the ill nurture , devoid of all gentilesse and courtesy , which you have doubtless had in the land of slaves and tyrants , we are disposed to set you free , unharmed , on these conditions : first , that ---- "
" Curse you for a barbarian dog ! " spluttered Rabadash .
" Do you think I will even hear your conditions ?
Faugh !
You talk very largely of nurture and I know not what .
It 's easy , to a man in chains , ha !
Take off these vile bonds , give me a sword , and let any of you who dares then debate with me . "
Nearly all the lords sprang to their feet , and Corin shouted :
" Father !
Can I _box_ him ?
Please . "
" Peace !
Your Majesties !
My Lords ! " said King Lune .
" Have we no more gravity among us than to be so chafed by the taunt of a pajock ?
Sit down , Corin , or shalt leave the table .
I ask your Highness again , to hear our conditions . "
" I hear no conditions from barbarians and sorcerers , " said Rabadash .
" Not one of you dare touch a hair of my head .
Every insult you have heaped on me shall be paid with oceans of Narnian and Archenlandish blood .
Terrible shall the vengeance of the Tisroc be : even now .
But kill me , and the burnings and torturings in these northern lands shall become a tale to frighten the world a thousand years hence .
Beware !
Beware !
Beware !
The bolt of Tash falls from above ! "
" Does it ever get caught on a hook half way ? " asked Corin .
" Shame , Corin , " said the King .
" Never taunt a man save when he is stronger than you : then , as you please . "
" Oh you foolish Rabadash , " sighed Lucy .
Next moment Cor wondered why everyone at the table had risen and was standing perfectly still .
Of course he did the same himself .
And then he saw the reason .
Aslan was among them though no - one had seen him coming .
Rabadash started as the immense shape of the Lion paced softly in between him and his accusers .
" Rabadash , " said Aslan .
" Take heed .
Your doom is very near , but you may still avoid it .
Forget your pride ( what have you to be proud of ? ) and your anger ( who has done you wrong ? ) and accept the mercy of these good kings . "
Then Rabadash rolled his eyes and spread out his mouth into a horrible , long mirthless grin like a shark , and wagged his ears up and down ( anyone can learn how to do this if they take the trouble ) .
He had always found this very effective in Calormen .
The bravest had trembled when he made these faces , and ordinary people had fallen to the floor , and sensitive people had often fainted .
But what Rabadash had n't realised is that it is very easy to frighten people who know you can have them boiled alive the moment you give the word .
The grimaces did n't look at all alarming in Archenland ; indeed Lucy only thought Rabadash was going to be sick .
" Demon !
Demon !
Demon ! " shrieked the Prince .
" I know you .
You are the foul fiend of Narnia .
You are the enemy of the gods .
Learn who _I_ am , horrible phantasm .
I am descended from Tash , the inexorable , the irresistible .
The curse of Tash is upon you .
Lightning in the shape of scorpions shall be rained on you .
The mountains of Narnia shall be ground into dust .
The ---- "
" Have a care , Rabadash , " said Aslan quietly .
" The doom is nearer now : it is at the door : it has lifted the latch . "
" Let the skies fall , " shrieked Rabadash .
" Let the earth gape !
Let blood and fire obliterate the world !
But be sure I will never desist till I have dragged to my palace by her hair the barbarian queen , the daughter of dogs , the ---- "
" The hour has struck , " said Aslan : and Rabadash saw , to his supreme horror , that everyone had begun to laugh .
They could n't help it .
Rabadash had been wagging his ears all the time and as soon as Aslan said , " The hour has struck ! " the ears began to change .
They grew longer and more pointed and soon were covered with grey hair .
And while everyone was wondering where they had seen ears like that before , Rabadash 's face began to change too .
It grew longer , and thicker at the top and larger eyed , and the nose sank back into the face ( or else the face swelled out and became all nose ) and there was hair all over it .
And his arms grew longer and came down in front of him till his hands were resting on the ground : only they were n't hands , now , they were hoofs .
And he was standing on all fours , and his clothes disappeared , and everyone laughed louder and louder ( because they could n't help it ) for now what had been Rabadash was simply and unmistakably , a donkey .
The terrible thing was that his human speech lasted just a moment longer than his human shape , so that when he realised the change that was coming over him , he screamed out :
" Oh , not a Donkey !
Mercy !
If it were even a horse -- even a horse -- e'en -- a -- hor -- eeh -- auh , eeh - auh . "
And so the words died away into a donkey 's bray .
" Now hear me , Rabadash , " said Aslan .
" Justice shall be mixed with mercy .
You shall not always be an Ass . "
At this of course the Donkey twitched its ears forward -- and that also was so funny that everybody laughed all the more .
They tried not to , but they tried in vain .
" You have appealed to Tash , " said Aslan .
" And in the temple of Tash you shall be healed .
You must stand before the altar of Tash in Tashbaan at the great Autumn Feast this year and there , in the sight of all Tashbaan , your ass 's shape will fall from you and all men will know you for Prince Rabadash .
But as long as you live , if ever you go more than ten miles away from the great temple in Tashbaan you shall instantly become again as you now are .
And from that second change there will be no return . "
There was a short silence and then they all stirred and looked at one another as if they were waking from sleep .
Aslan was gone .
But there was a brightness in the air and on the grass , and a joy in their hearts , which assured them that he had been no dream : and anyway , there was the donkey in front of them .
King Lune was the kindest - hearted of men and on seeing his enemy in this regrettable condition he forgot all his anger .
" Your royal Highness , " he said , " I am most truly sorry that things have come to this extremity .
Your Highness will bear witness that it was none of our doing .
And of course we shall be delighted to provide your Highness with shipping back to Tashbaan for the -- er -- treatment which Aslan has prescribed .
You shall have every comfort which your Highness 's situation allows : the best of the cattle - boats -- the freshest carrots and thistles ---- "
But a deafening bray from the Donkey and a well - aimed kick at one of the guards made it clear that these kindly offers were ungratefully received .
And here , to get him out of the way , I 'd better finish off the story of Rabadash .
He ( or it ) was duly sent back by boat to Tashbaan and brought into the temple of Tash at the great Autumn Festival , and then he became a man again .
But of course four or five thousand people had seen the transformation and the affair could not possibly be hushed up .
And after the old Tisroc 's death when Rabadash became Tisroc in his place he turned out the most peaceable Tisroc Calormen had ever known .
This was because , not daring to go more than ten miles from Tashbaan , he could never go on a war himself ; and he did n't want his Tarkaans to win fame in the wars at his expense , for that is the way Tisrocs get overthrown .
But though his reasons were selfish , it made things much more comfortable for all the smaller countries round Calormen .
His own people never forgot that he had been a donkey .
During his reign , and to his face , he was called Rabadash the Peacemaker , but after his death and behind his back he was called Rabadash the Ridiculous , and if you look him up in a good History of Calormen ( try the local library ) you will find him under that name .
And to this day in Calormene schools , if you do anything unusually stupid , you are very likely to be called " a second Rabadash " .
Meanwhile at Anvard everyone was very glad that he had been disposed of before the real fun began , which was a grand feast held that evening on the lawn before the castle , with dozens of lanterns to help the moonlight .
And the wine flowed and tales were told and jokes were cracked , and then silence was made and the King 's poet with two fiddlers stepped out into the middle of the circle .
Aravis and Cor prepared themselves to be bored , for the only poetry they knew was the Calormene kind , and you know now what that was like .
But at the very first scrape of the fiddles a rocket seemed to go up inside their heads , and the poet sang the great old lay of Fair Olvin and how he fought the Giant Pire and turned him into stone ( and that is the origin of Mount Pire -- it was a two - headed Giant ) and won the Lady Liln for his bride ; and when it was over they wished it was going to begin again .
And though Bree could n't sing he told the story of the fight at Zalindreh .
And Lucy told again ( they had all , except Aravis and Cor , heard it many times but they all wanted it again ) the tale of the Wardrobe and how she and King Edmund and Queen Susan and Peter the High King had first come into Narnia .
And presently , as was certain to happen sooner or later , King Lune said it was time for young people to be in bed .
" And to - morrow , Cor , " he added , " shalt come over all the castle with me and see the estres and mark all its strength and weakness : for it will be thine to guard when I 'm gone . "
" But Corin will be the King then , Father , " said Cor.
" Nay , lad , " said King Lune , " thou art my heir .
The crown comes to thee . "
" But I do n't want it , " said Cor. " I 'd far rather ---- "
" 'Tis no question what thou wantest , Cor , nor I either .
'Tis in course of law . "
" But if we 're twins we must be the same age . "
" Nay , " said the King with a laugh .
" One must come first .
Art Corin 's elder by full twenty minutes .
And his better too , let 's hope , though that 's no great mastery . "
And he looked at Corin with a twinkle in his eyes .
" But , Father , could n't you make whichever you like to be the next King ? "
" No .
The King 's under the law , for it 's the law makes him a king .
Hast no more power to start away from thy crown than any sentry from his post . "
" Oh dear , " said Cor. " I do n't want to at all .
And Corin -- I am most dreadfully sorry .
I never dreamed my turning up was going to chisel you out of your kingdom . "
" Hurrah !
Hurrah ! " said Corin .
" I sha n't have to be King .
I sha n't have to be King .
I 'll always be a prince .
It 's princes have all the fun . "
" And that 's truer than thy brother knows , Cor , " said King Lune .
" For this is what it means to be a king : to be first in every desperate attack and last in every desperate retreat , and when there 's hunger in the land ( as must be now and then in bad years ) to wear finer clothes and laugh louder over a scantier meal than any man in your land . "
When the two boys were going upstairs to bed Cor again asked Corin if nothing could be done about it .
And Corin said :
" If you say another word about it , I 'll -- I 'll knock you down . "
It would be nice to end the story by saying that after that the two brothers never disagreed about anything again , but I am afraid it would not be true .
In reality they quarrelled and fought just about as often as any other two boys would , and all their fights ended ( if they did n't begin ) with Cor getting knocked down .
For though , when they had both grown up and become swordsmen , Cor was the more dangerous man in battle , neither he nor anyone else in the North Countries could ever equal Corin as a boxer .
That was how he got his name of Corin Thunder - Fist ; and how he performed his great exploit against the Lapsed Bear of Stormness , which was really a Talking Bear but had gone back to Wild Bear habits .
Corin climbed up to its lair on the Narnian side of Stormness one winter day when the snow was on the hills and boxed it without a timekeeper for thirty - three rounds .
And at the end it could n't see out of its eyes and became a reformed character .
Aravis also had many quarrels ( and , I 'm afraid even fights ) with Cor , but they always made it up again : so that years later , when they were grown up , they were so used to quarrelling and making it up again that they got married so as to go on doing it more conveniently .
And after King Lune 's death they made a good King and Queen of Archenland and Ram the Great , the most famous of all the kings of Archenland , was their son .
Bree and Hwin lived happily to a great age in Narnia and both got married but not to one another .
And there were n't many months in which one or both of them did n't come trotting over the pass to visit their friends at Anvard .