What had really happened was this .
When Aravis saw Shasta hurried away by the Narnians and found herself alone with two horses who ( very wisely ) would n't say a word , she never lost her head even for a moment .
She grabbed Bree 's halter and stood still , holding both the horses ; and though her heart was beating as hard as a hammer , she did nothing to show it .
As soon as the Narnian lords had passed she tried to move on again .
But before she could take a step , another crier ( " Bother all these people " thought Aravis ) was heard shouting out , " Way , way , way !
Way for the Tarkheena Lasaraleen ! " and immediately , following the crier , came four armed slaves and then four bearers carrying a litter which was all a-flutter with silken curtains and all a-jingle with silver bells and which scented the whole street with perfumes and flowers .
After the litter , female slaves in beautiful clothes , and then a few grooms , runners , pages , and the like .
And now Aravis made her first mistake .
She knew Lasaraleen quite well -- almost as if they had been at school together -- because they had often stayed in the same houses and been to the same parties .
And Aravis could n't help looking up to see what Lasaraleen looked like now that she was married and a very great person indeed .
It was fatal .
The eyes of the two girls met .
And immediately Lasaraleen sat up in the litter and burst out at the top of her voice .
" Aravis !
What on earth are you doing here ?
Your father ---- "
There was not a moment to lose .
Without a second 's delay Aravis let go the horses , caught the edge of the litter , swung herself up beside Lasaraleen and whispered furiously in her ear .
" Shut up !
Do you hear !
Shut up .
You must hide me .
Tell your people ---- "
" But darling ---- " began Lasaraleen in the same loud voice .
( She did n't in the least mind making people stare ; in fact she rather liked it . )
" Do what I tell you or I 'll never speak to you again , " hissed Aravis .
" Please , please be quick , Las .
It 's frightfully important .
Tell your people to bring those two horses along .
Pull all the curtains of the litter and get away somewhere where I ca n't be found .
And do hurry . "
" All right , darling , " said Lasaraleen in her lazy voice .
" Here .
Two of you take the Tarkheena 's horses . "
( This was to the slaves . )
" And now home .
I say , darling , do you think we really want the curtains drawn on a day like this ?
I mean to say ---- "
But Aravis had already drawn the curtains , enclosing Lasaraleen and herself in a rich and scented , but rather stuffy , kind of tent .
" I must n't be seen , " she said .
" My father does n't know I 'm here .
I 'm running away . "
" My dear , how perfectly thrilling , " said Lasaraleen .
" I 'm dying to hear all about it .
Darling , you 're sitting on my dress .
Do you mind ?
That 's better .
It is a new one .
Do you like it ?
I got it at ---- "
" Oh Las , do be serious , " said Aravis .
" Where is my father ? "
" Did n't you know ? " said Lasaraleen .
" He 's here , of course .
He came to town yesterday and is asking about you everywhere .
And to think of you and me being here together and his not knowing anything about it !
It 's the funniest thing I ever heard . "
And she went off into giggles .
She always had been a terrible giggler , as Aravis now remembered .
" It is n't funny at all , " she said .
" It 's dreadfully serious .
Where can you hide me ? "
" No difficulty at all , my dear girl , " said Lasaraleen .
" I 'll take you home .
My husband 's away and no - one will see you .
Phew !
It 's not much fun with the curtains drawn .
I want to see people .
There 's no point in having a new dress on if one 's to go about shut up like this . "
" I hope no - one heard you when you shouted out to me like that , " said Aravis .
" No , no , of course , darling , " said Lasaraleen absent - mindedly .
" But you have n't even told me yet what you think of the dress . "
" Another thing , " said Aravis .
" You must tell your people to treat those two horses very respectfully .
That 's part of the secret .
They 're really Talking Horses from Narnia . "
" Fancy ! " said Lasaraleen .
" How exciting !
And oh , darling , have you seen the barbarian queen from Narnia ?
She 's staying in Tashbaan at present .
They say Prince Rabadash is madly in love with her .
There have been the most wonderful parties and hunts and things all this last fortnight .
I ca n't see that she 's so very pretty myself .
But some of the Narnian men are lovely .
I was taken out on a river party the day before yesterday , and I was wearing my ---- "
" How shall we prevent your people telling everyone that you 've got a visitor -- dressed like a beggar 's brat -- in your house ?
It might so easily get round to my father . "
" Now do n't keep on fussing , there 's a dear , " said Lasaraleen .
" We 'll get you some proper clothes in a moment .
And here we are ! "
The bearers had stopped and the litter was being lowered .
When the curtains had been drawn Aravis found that she was in a courtyard - garden very like the one that Shasta had been taken into a few minutes earlier in another part of the city .
Lasaraleen would have gone indoors at once but Aravis reminded her in a frantic whisper to say something to the slaves about not telling anyone of their mistress 's strange visitor .
" Sorry , darling , it had gone right out of my head , " said Lasaraleen .
" Here .
All of you .
And you , doorkeeper .
No - one is to be let out of the house to - day .
And anyone I catch talking about this young lady will be first beaten to death and then burned alive and after that be kept on bread and water for six weeks .
There . "
Although Lasaraleen had said she was dying to hear Aravis 's story , she showed no sign of really wanting to hear it at all .
She was , in fact , much better at talking than at listening .
She insisted on Aravis having a long and luxurious bath ( Calormene baths are famous ) and then dressing her up in the finest clothes before she would let her explain anything .
The fuss she made about choosing the dresses nearly drove Aravis mad .
She remembered now that Lasaraleen had always been like that , interested in clothes and parties and gossip .
Aravis had always been more interested in bows and arrows and horses and dogs and swimming .
You will guess that each thought the other silly .
But when at last they were both seated after a meal ( it was chiefly of the whipped cream and jelly and fruit and ice sort ) in a beautiful pillared room ( which Aravis would have liked better if Lasaraleen 's spoiled pet monkey had n't been climbing about it all the time ) Lasaraleen at last asked her why she was running away from home .
When Aravis had finished telling her story , Lasaraleen said , " But darling , why _don't_ you marry Ahoshta Tarkaan ?
Everyone 's crazy about him .
My husband says he is beginning to be one of the greatest men in Calormen .
He has just been made Grand Vizier now old Axartha has died .
Did n't you know ? "
" I do n't care .
I ca n't stand the sight of him , " said Aravis .
" But darling , only think !
Three palaces , and one of them that beautiful one down on the lake at Ilkeen .
Positively ropes of pearls , I 'm told .
Baths of asses ' milk .
And you 'd see such a lot of _me_ . "
" He can keep his pearls and palaces as far as I 'm concerned , " said Aravis .
" You always _were_ a queer girl , Aravis , " said Lasaraleen .
" What more _do_ you want ? "
In the end , however , Aravis managed to make her friend believe that she was in earnest and even to discuss plans .
There would be no difficulty now about getting the two horses out of the North gate and then on to the Tombs .
No - one would stop or question a groom in fine clothes leading a war horse and a lady 's saddle horse down to the river , and Lasaraleen had plenty of grooms to send .
It was n't so easy to decide what to do about Aravis herself .
She suggested that she could be carried out in the litter with the curtains drawn .
But Lasaraleen told her that litters were only used in the city and the sight of one going out through the gate would be certain to lead to questions .
When they had talked for a long time -- and it was all the longer because Aravis found it hard to keep her friend to the point -- at last Lasaraleen clapped her hands and said , " Oh , I have an idea .
There is _one_ way of getting out of the city without using the gates .
The Tisroc 's garden ( may he live for ever ! ) runs right down to the water and there is a little water - door .
Only for the palace people of course -- but then you know , dear ( here she tittered a little ) we almost _are_ palace people .
I say , it is lucky for you that you came to _me_ .
The dear Tisroc ( may he live for ever ! ) is so kind .
We 're asked to the palace almost every day and it is like a second home .
I love all the dear princes and princesses and I positively adore Prince Rabadash .
I might run in and see any of the palace ladies at any hour of the day or night .
Why should n't I slip in with you , after dark , and let you out by the water - door ?
There are always a few punts and things tied up outside it .
And even if we were caught ---- "
" All would be lost , " said Aravis .
" Oh darling , do n't get so excited , " said Lasaraleen .
" I was going to say , even if we were caught everyone would only say it was one of my mad jokes .
I 'm getting quite well known for them .
Only the other day -- do listen , dear , this is frightfully funny ---- "
" I meant , all would be lost _for me_ , " said Aravis a little sharply .
" Oh -- ah -- yes -- I _do_ see what you mean , darling .
Well , can you think of any better plan ? "
Aravis could n't , and answered , " No .
We 'll have to risk it .
When can we start ? "
" Oh , not to - night , " said Lasaraleen .
" Of course not to - night .
There 's a great feast on to - night ( I must start getting my hair done for it in a few minutes ) and the whole place will be a blaze of lights .
And such a crowd too !
It would have to be to - morrow night . "
This was bad news for Aravis , but she had to make the best of it .
The afternoon passed very slowly and it was a relief when Lasaraleen went out to the banquet , for Aravis was very tired of her giggling and her talk about dresses and parties , weddings and engagements and scandals .
She went to bed early and that part she did enjoy : it was so nice to have pillows and sheets again .
But the next day passed very slowly .
Lasaraleen wanted to go back on the whole arrangement and kept on telling Aravis that Narnia was a country of perpetual snow and ice inhabited by demons and sorcerers , and she was mad to think of going there .
" And with a peasant boy , too ! " said Lasaraleen .
" Darling , think of it !
It 's not Nice . "
Aravis had thought of it a good deal , but she was so tired of Lasaraleen 's silliness by now that , for the first time , she began to think that travelling with Shasta was really rather more fun than fashionable life in Tashbaan .
So she only replied , " You forget that I 'll be a nobody , just like him , when we get to Narnia .
And anyway , I promised . "
" And to think , " said Lasaraleen , almost crying , " that if only you had sense you could be the wife of a Grand Vizier ! "
Aravis went away to have a private word with the horses .
" You must go with a groom a little before sunset down to the Tombs , " she said .
" No more of those packs .
You 'll be saddled and bridled again .
But there 'll have to be food in Hwin 's saddle - bags and a full water - skin behind yours , Bree .
The man has orders to let you both have a good long drink at the far side of the bridge . "
" And then , Narnia and the North ! " whispered Bree .
" But what if Shasta is not at the Tombs ? "
" Wait for him of course , " said Aravis .
" I hope you 've been quite comfortable . "
" Never better stabled in my life , " said Bree .
" But if the husband of that tittering Tarkheena friend of yours is paying his head groom to get the best oats , then I think the head groom is cheating him . "
Aravis and Lasaraleen had supper in the pillared room .
About two hours later they were ready to start .
Aravis was dressed to look like a superior slave - girl in a great house and wore a veil over her face .
They had agreed that if any questions were asked Lasaraleen would pretend that Aravis was a slave she was taking as a present to one of the princesses .
The two girls went out on foot .
A very few minutes brought them to the palace gates .
Here there were of course soldiers on guard but the officer knew Lasaraleen quite well and called his men to attention and saluted .
They passed at once into the Hall of Black Marble .
A fair number of courtiers , slaves and others were still moving about here but this only made the two girls less conspicuous .
They passed on into the Hall of Pillars and then into the Hall of Statues and down the colonnade , passing the great beaten - copper doors of the throne room .
It was all magnificent beyond description ; what they could see of it in the dim light of the lamps .
Presently they came out into the garden - court which sloped downhill in a number of terraces .
On the far side of that they came to the Old Palace .
It had already grown almost quite dark and they now found themselves in a maze of corridors lit only by occasional torches fixed in brackets to the walls .
Lasaraleen halted at a place where you had to go either left or right .
" Go on , do go on , " whispered Aravis , whose heart was beating terribly and who still felt that her father might run into them at any corner .
" I 'm just wondering ... " said Lasaraleen .
" I 'm not absolutely sure which way we go from here .
I _think_ it 's the left .
Yes , I 'm almost sure it 's the left .
What fun this is ! "
They took the left hand way and found themselves in a passage that was hardly lighted at all and which soon began going down steps .
" It 's all right , " said Lasaraleen .
" I 'm sure we 're right now .
I remember these steps . "
But at that moment a moving light appeared ahead .
A second later there appeared from round a distant corner , the dark shapes of two men walking backwards and carrying tall candles .
And of course it is only before royalties that people walk backwards .
Aravis felt Lasaraleen grip her arm -- that sort of sudden grip which is almost a pinch and which means that the person who is gripping you is very frightened indeed .
Aravis thought it odd that Lasaraleen should be so afraid of the Tisroc if he were really such a friend of hers , but there was no time to go on thinking .
Lasaraleen was hurrying her back to the top of the steps , on tiptoe , and groping wildly along the wall .
" Here 's a door , " she whispered .
" Quick . "
They went in , drew the door very softly behind them , and found themselves in pitch darkness .
Aravis could hear by Lasaraleen 's breathing that she was terrified .
" Tash preserve us ! " whispered Lasaraleen .
" What _shall_ we do if he comes in here .
Can we hide ? "
There was a soft carpet under their feet .
They groped forward into the room and blundered onto a sofa .
" Let 's lie down behind it , " whimpered Lasaraleen .
" Oh , I _do_ wish we had n't come . "
There was just room between the sofa and the curtained wall and the two girls got down .
Lasaraleen managed to get the better position and was completely covered .
The upper part of Aravis 's face stuck out beyond the sofa , so that if anyone came into that room with a light and happened to look in exactly the right place they would see her .
But of course , because she was wearing a veil , what they saw would not at once look like a forehead and a pair of eyes .
Aravis shoved desperately to try to make Lasaraleen give her a little more room .
But Lasaraleen , now quite selfish in her panic , fought back and pinched her feet .
They gave it up and lay still , panting a little .
Their own breath seemed dreadfully noisy , but there was no other noise .
" Is it safe ? " said Aravis at last in the tiniest possible whisper .
" I -- I -- _think_ so , " began Lasaraleen .
" But my poor nerves ---- " and then came the most terrible noise they could have heard at that moment : the noise of the door opening .
And then came light .
And because Aravis could n't get her head any further in behind the sofa , she saw everything .
First came the two slaves ( deaf and dumb , as Aravis rightly guessed , and therefore used at the most secret councils ) walking backwards and carrying the candles .
They took up their stand one at each end of the sofa .
This was a good thing , for of course it was now harder for anyone to see Aravis once a slave was in front of her and she was looking between his heels .
Then came an old man , very fat , wearing a curious pointed cap by which she immediately knew that he was the Tisroc .
The least of the jewels with which he was covered was worth more than all the clothes and weapons of the Narnian lords put together : but he was so fat and such a mass of frills and pleats and bobbles and buttons and tassels and talismans that Aravis could n't help thinking the Narnian fashions ( at any rate for men ) looked nicer .
After him came a tall young man with a feathered and jewelled turban on his head and an ivory - sheathed scimitar at his side .
He seemed very excited and his eyes and teeth flashed fiercely in the candlelight .
Last of all came a little hump - backed , wizened old man in whom she recognised with a shudder the new Grand Vizier and her own betrothed husband , Ahoshta Tarkaan himself .
As soon as all three had entered the room and the door was shut , the Tisroc seated himself on the divan with a sigh of contentment , the young man took his place , standing , before him and the Grand Vizier got down on his knees and elbows and laid his face flat on the carpet .