" Wake up , Digory , wake up , Fledge , " came the voice of Polly .
" It _has_ turned into a toffee tree .
And it 's the loveliest morning . "
The low early sunshine was streaming through the wood and the grass was grey with dew and the cobwebs were like silver .
Just beside them was a little , very dark - wooded tree , about the size of an apple tree .
The leaves were whitish and rather papery , like the herb called honesty , and it was loaded with little brown fruits that looked rather like dates .
" Hurrah ! " said Digory .
" But I 'm going to have a dip first . "
He rushed through a flowering thicket or two down to the river 's edge .
Have you ever bathed in a mountain river that is rushing in shallow cataracts over red and blue and yellow stones with the sun on it ?
It is as good as the sea : in some ways almost better .
Of course , he had to dress again without drying but it was well worth it .
When he came back , Polly went down and had her bath ; at least she said that was what she 'd been doing , but we know she was not much of a swimmer and perhaps it is best not to ask too many questions .
Fledge visited the river too but he only stood in mid stream , stooping down for a long drink of water and then shaking his mane and neighing several times .
Polly and Digory got to work on the toffee tree .
The fruit was delicious : not exactly like toffee -- softer for one thing , and juicy -- but like fruit which reminded one of toffee .
Fledge also made an excellent breakfast : he tried one of the toffee fruits and liked it but said he felt more like grass at that hour in the morning .
Then with some difficulty the children got on his back and the second journey began .
It was even better than yesterday , partly because everyone was feeling so fresh , and partly because the newly risen sun was at their backs and , of course , everything looks nicer when the light is behind you .
It was a wonderful ride .
The big snowy mountains rose above them in every direction .
The valleys , far beneath them , were so green , and all the streams which tumbled down from the glaciers into the main river were so blue , that it was like flying over gigantic pieces of jewellery .
They would have liked this part of the adventure to go on longer than it did .
But quite soon they were all sniffing the air and saying " What is it ? " and " Did you smell something ? " and " Where 's it coming from ? "
For a heavenly smell , warm and golden , as if from all the most delicious fruits and flowers of the world , was coming up to them from somewhere ahead .
" It 's coming from that valley with the lake in it , " said Fledge .
" So it is , " said Digory .
" And look !
There 's a green hill at the far end of the lake .
And look how blue the water is . "
" It must be the Place , " said all three .
Fledge came lower and lower in wide circles .
The icy peaks rose up higher and higher above .
The air came up warmer and sweeter every moment , so sweet that it almost brought the tears to your eyes .
Fledge was now gliding with his great wings spread out motionless on each side , and his hoofs pawing for the ground .
The steep green hill was rushing towards them .
A moment later he alighted on its slope , a little awkwardly .
The children rolled off , fell without hurting themselves on the warm , fine grass , and stood up panting a little .
They were about three quarters of the way up the hill , and set out at once to climb to the top .
( I do n't think Fledge could have managed this without his wings to balance him and to give him the help of a flutter now and then . )
All round the very top of the hill ran a high wall of green turf .
Inside the wall trees were growing .
Their branches hung out over the wall : their leaves showed not only green but also blue and silver when the wind stirred them .
When the travellers reached the top they walked nearly all the way round it outside the green wall before they found the gates : high gates of gold , fast shut , facing due east .
Up till now I think Fledge and Polly had had the idea that they would go in with Digory .
But they thought so no longer .
You never saw a place which was so obviously private .
You could see at a glance that it belonged to someone else .
Only a fool would dream of going in unless he had been sent there on very special business .
Digory himself understood at once that the others would n't and could n't come in with him .
He went forward to the gates alone .
When he had come close up to them he saw words written on the gold with silver letters ; something like this :
Come in by the gold gates or not at all , Take of my fruit for others or forbear .
For those who steal or those who climb my wall Shall find their heart 's desire and find despair .
" _Take of my fruit for others_ , " said Digory to himself .
" Well , that 's what I 'm going to do .
It means I must n't eat any myself , I suppose .
I do n't know what all that jaw in the last line is about .
_Come in by the gold gates_ .
Well who 'd want to climb a wall if he could get in by a gate !
But how do the gates open ? "
He laid his hand on them and instantly they swung apart , opening inwards , turning on their hinges without the least noise .
Now that he could see into the place it looked more private than ever .
He went in very solemnly , looking about him .
Everything was very quiet inside .
Even the fountain which rose near the middle of the garden made only the faintest sound .
The lovely smell was all round him : it was a happy place but very serious .
He knew which was the right tree at once , partly because it stood in the very centre and partly because the great silver apples with which it was loaded shone so and cast a light of their own down on the shadowy places where the sunlight did not reach .
He walked straight across to it , picked an apple , and put it in the breast pocket of his Norfolk jacket .
But he could n't help looking at it and smelling it before he put it away .
It would have been better if he had not .
A terrible thirst and hunger came over him and a longing to taste that fruit .
He put it hastily into his pocket ; but there were plenty of others .
Could it be wrong to taste one ?
After all , he thought , the notice on the gate might not have been exactly an order ; it might have been only a piece of advice -- and who cares about advice ?
Or even if it were an order , would he be disobeying it by eating an apple ?
He had already obeyed the part about taking one " for others . "
While he was thinking of all this he happened to look up through the branches towards the top of the tree .
There , on a branch above his head , a wonderful bird was roosting .
I say " roosting " because it seemed almost asleep : perhaps not quite .
The tiniest slit of one eye was open .
It was larger than an eagle , its breast saffron , its head crested with scarlet , and its tail purple .
" And it just shows , " said Digory afterwards when he was telling the story to the others , " that you ca n't be too careful in these magical places .
You never know what may be watching you . "
But I think Digory would not have taken an apple for himself in any case .
Things like Do Not Steal were , I think , hammered into boys ' heads a good deal harder in those days than they are now .
Still , we can never be certain .
Digory was just turning to go back to the gates when he stopped to have one last look round .
He got a terrible shock .
He was not alone .
There , only a few yards away from him stood the Witch .
She was just throwing away the core of an apple which she had eaten .
The juice was darker than you would expect and had made a horrid stain round her mouth .
Digory guessed at once that she must have climbed in over the wall .
And he began to see that there might be some sense in that last line about getting your heart 's desire and getting despair along with it .
For the Witch looked stronger and prouder than ever , and even , in a way , triumphant : but her face was deadly white , white as salt .
All this flashed through Digory 's mind in a second ; then he took to his heels and ran for the gates as hard as he could pelt ; the Witch after him .
As soon as he was out , the gates closed behind him of their own accord .
That gave him the lead but not for long .
By the time he had reached the others and was shouting out " Quick , get on , Polly !
Get up , Fledge , " the Witch had climbed the wall , or vaulted over it , and was close behind him again .
" Stay where you are , " cried Digory , turning round to face her , " or we 'll all vanish .
Do n't come an inch nearer . "
" Foolish boy , " said the Witch .
" Why do you run from me ?
I mean you no harm .
If you do not stop and listen to me now you will miss some knowledge that would have made you happy all your life . "
" Well I do n't want to hear it , thanks , " said Digory .
But he did .
" I know what errand you have come on , " continued the Witch .
" For it was I who was close beside you in the woods last night and heard all your counsels .
You have plucked fruit in the garden yonder .
You have it in your pocket now .
And you are going to carry it back , untasted , to the Lion ; for _him_ to eat , for _him_ to use .
You simpleton !
Do you know what that fruit is ?
I will tell you .
It is the apple of youth , the apple of life .
I know , for I have tasted it ; and I feel already such changes in myself that I know I shall never grow old or die .
Eat it , Boy , eat it ; and you and I will both live forever and be king and queen of this whole world -- or of your world if we decide to go back there . "
" No thanks , " said Digory , " I do n't know that I care much about living on and on after everyone I know is dead .
I 'd rather live an ordinary time and die and go to Heaven . "
" But what about this Mother of yours whom you pretend to love so ? "
" What 's she got to do with it ? " said Digory .
" Do you not see , Fool , that one bite of that apple would heal her ?
You have it in your pocket .
We are here by ourselves and the Lion is far away .
Use your Magic and go back to your own world .
A minute later you can be at your Mother 's bedside , giving her the fruit .
Five minutes later you will see the colour coming back to her face .
She will tell you the pain is gone .
Soon she will tell you she feels stronger .
Then she will fall asleep -- think of that ; hours of sweet natural sleep , without pain , without drugs .
Next day everyone will be saying how wonderfully she has recovered .
Soon she will be quite well again .
All will be well again .
Your home will be happy again .
You will be like other boys . "
" Oh ! " gasped Digory as if he had been hurt , and put his hand to his head .
For he now knew that the most terrible choice lay before him .
" What has Lion ever done for you that you should be his slave ? " said the Witch .
" What can he do to you once you are back in your own world ?
And what would your Mother think if she knew that you _could_ have taken her pain away and given her back her life and saved your Father 's heart from being broken , and that you _wouldn't_ -- that you 'd rather run messages for a wild animal in a strange world that is no business of yours ? "
" I -- I do n't think he is a wild animal , " said Digory in a dried - up sort of voice .
" He is -- I do n't know ---- "
" Then he is something worse , " said the Witch .
" Look what he has done to you already : look how heartless he has made you .
That is what he does to everyone who listens to him .
Cruel , pitiless boy ! you would let your own Mother die rather than ---- "
" Oh shut up , " said the miserable Digory , still in the same voice .
" Do you think I do n't see ?
But I -- I promised . "
" Ah , but you did n't know what you were promising .
And no one here can prevent you . "
" Mother herself , " said Digory , getting the words out with difficulty , " would n't like it -- awfully strict about keeping promises -- and not stealing -- and all that sort of thing .
_She'd_ tell me not to do it -- quick as anything -- if she was here . "
" But she need never know , " said the Witch , speaking more sweetly than you would have thought anyone with so fierce a face could speak .
" You would n't tell her how you 'd got the apple .
Your Father need never know .
No one in your world need know anything about this whole story .
You need n't take the little girl back with you , you know . "
That was where the Witch made her fatal mistake .
Of course Digory knew that Polly could get away by her own Ring as easily as he could get away by his .
But apparently the Witch did n't know this .
And the meanness of the suggestion that he should leave Polly behind suddenly made all the other things the Witch had been saying to him sound false and hollow .
And even in the midst of all his misery , his head suddenly cleared , and he said ( in a different and much louder voice ):
" Look here ; where do _you_ come into all this ?
Why are _you_ so precious fond of _my_ Mother all of a sudden ?
What 's it got to do with you ?
What 's your game ? "
" Good for you , Digs , " whispered Polly in his ear .
" Quick !
Get away _now_ . "
She had n't dared to say anything all through the argument because , you see , it was n't her mother who was dying .
" Up then , " said Digory , heaving her on to Fledge 's back and then scrambling up as quickly as he could .
The horse spread its wings .
" Go then , Fools , " called the Witch .
" Think of me , Boy , when you lie old and weak and dying , and remember how you threw away the chance of endless youth !
It wo n't be offered you again . "
They were already so high that they could only just hear her .
Nor did the Witch waste any time gazing up at them ; they saw her set off northward down the slope of the hill .
They had started early that morning and what happened in the garden had not taken very long , so that Fledge and Polly both said they would easily get back to Narnia before nightfall .
Digory never spoke on the way back , and the others were shy of speaking to him .
He was very sad and he was n't even sure all the time that he had done the right thing : but whenever he remembered the shining tears in Aslan 's eyes he became sure .
All day Fledge flew steadily with untiring wings ; eastward with the river to guide him , through the mountains and over the wild wooded hills , and then over the great waterfall and down , and down , to where the woods of Narnia were darkened by the shadow of the mighty cliff , till at last , when the sky was growing red with sunset behind them , he saw a place where many creatures were gathered together by the riverside .
And soon he could see Aslan himself in the midst of them .
Fledge glided down , spread out his four legs , closed his wings , and landed cantering .
Then he pulled up .
The children dismounted .
Digory saw all the animals , dwarfs , satyrs , nymphs and other things drawing back to the left and right to make way for him .
He walked straight up to Aslan , handed him the apple and said :
" I 've brought you the apple you wanted , sir . "