" You need no Rings when I am with you , " said the voice of Aslan .
The children blinked and looked about them .
They were once more in the Wood between the Worlds ; Uncle Andrew lay on the grass , still asleep ; Aslan stood beside them .
" Come , " said Aslan , " it is time that you went back .
But there are two things to see to first ; a warning , and a command .
Look here , children . "
They looked and saw a little hollow in the grass , with a grassy bottom , warm and dry .
" When you were last here , " said Aslan , " that hollow was a pool , and when you jumped into it you came to the world where a dying sun shone over the ruins of Charn .
There is no pool now .
That world is ended , as if it had never been .
Let the race of Adam and Eve take warning . "
" Yes , Aslan , " said both the children .
But Polly added , " But we 're not quite as bad as that world , are we , Aslan ? "
" Not yet , Daughter of Eve , " he said .
" Not yet .
But you are growing more like it .
It is not certain that some wicked one of your race will not find out a secret as evil as the Deplorable Word and use it to destroy all living things .
And soon , very soon , before you are an old man and an old woman , great nations in your world will be ruled by tyrants who care no more for joy and justice and mercy than the Empress Jadis .
Let your world beware .
That is the warning .
Now for the command .
As soon as you can , take from this Uncle of yours his magic Rings and bury them so that no one can use them again . "
Both the children were looking up into the Lion 's face as he spoke these words .
And all at once ( they never knew exactly how it happened ) the face seemed to be a sea of tossing gold in which they were floating , and such a sweetness and power rolled about them and over them and entered into them that they felt they had never really been happy or wise or good , or even alive and awake , before .
And the memory of that moment stayed with them always , so that as long as they both lived , if ever they were sad or afraid or angry , the thought of all that golden goodness , and the feeling that it was still there , quite close , just round some corner or just behind some door , would come back and make them sure , deep down inside , that all was well .
Next minute all three of them ( Uncle Andrew now awake ) came tumbling into the noise , heat , and hot smell of London .
They were on the pavement outside the Ketterleys ' front door , and except that the Witch , the horse , and the Cabby were gone , everything was exactly as they had left it .
There was the lamp - post , with one arm missing ; there was the wreck of the hansom cab ; and there was the crowd .
Everyone was still talking and people were kneeling beside the damaged policeman , saying things like , " He 's coming round " or " How do you feel now , old chap ? " or " The ambulance will be here in a jiffy . "
" Great Scott ! " thought Digory , " I believe the whole adventure 's taken no time at all . "
Most people were wildly looking round for Jadis and the horse .
No one took any notice of the children for no one had seen them go or noticed them coming back .
As for Uncle Andrew , what between the state of his clothes and the honey on his face , he could not have been recognised by anyone .
Fortunately the front door of the house was open and the housemaid was standing in the doorway staring at the fun ( what a day that girl was having ! ) so the children had no difficulty in bustling Uncle Andrew indoors before anyone asked any questions .
He raced up the stairs before them and at first they were very afraid he was heading for his attic and meant to hide his remaining magic rings .
But they need n't have bothered .
What he was thinking about was the bottle in his wardrobe , and he disappeared at once into his bedroom and locked the door .
When he came out again ( which was not for a long time ) he was in his dressing gown and made straight for the bathroom .
" Can you get the other rings , Poll ? " said Digory .
" I want to go to Mother . "
" Right .
See you later , " said Polly and clattered up the attic stairs .
Then Digory took a minute to get his breath , and then went softly into Mother 's room .
And there she lay , as he had seen her lie so many other times , propped up on the pillows , with a wan , pale face that would make you cry to look at it .
Digory took the Apple of Life out of his pocket .
And just as the Witch Jadis had looked different when you saw her in our world instead of in her own , so the fruit of that mountain garden looked different too .
There were of course all sorts of coloured things in the bedroom ; the coloured counterpane on the bed , the wall - paper , the sunlight from the window , and Mother 's pretty , pale blue dressing jacket .
But the moment Digory took the Apple out of his pocket , all those other things seemed to have scarcely any colour at all .
Everyone of them , even the sunlight , looked faded and dingy .
The brightness of the Apple threw strange lights on the ceiling .
Nothing else was worth looking at : indeed you could n't look at anything else .
And the smell of the Apple of Youth was as if there was a window in the room that opened on Heaven .
" Oh , darling , how lovely , " said Digory 's Mother .
" You will eat it , wo n't you ?
Please , " said Digory .
" I do n't know what the Doctor would say , " she answered .
" But really -- I almost feel as if I could . "
He peeled it and cut it up and gave it to her piece by piece .
And no sooner had she finished it than she smiled and her head sank back on the pillow and she was asleep : a real , natural , gentle sleep , without any of those nasty drugs , which was , as Digory knew , the thing in the whole world that she wanted most .
And he was sure now that her face looked a little different .
He bent down and kissed her very softly and stole out of the room with a beating heart ; taking the core of the apple with him .
For the rest of that day , whenever he looked at the things about him , and saw how ordinary and unmagical they were , he hardly dared to hope ; but when he remembered the face of Aslan he did hope .
That evening he buried the core of the Apple in the back garden .
Next morning when the Doctor made his usual visit , Digory leaned over the bannisters to listen .
He heard the Doctor come out with Aunt Letty and say :
" Miss Ketterley , this is the most extraordinary case I have known in my whole medical career .
It is -- it is like a miracle .
I would n't tell the little boy anything at present ; we do n't want to raise any false hopes .
But in my opinion ---- " then his voice became too low to hear .
That afternoon he went down the garden and whistled their agreed secret signal for Polly ( she had n't been able to get back the day before ) .
" What luck ? " said Polly , looking over the wall .
" I mean , about your Mother ? "
" I think -- I _think_ it is going to be all right , " said Digory .
" But if you do n't mind I 'd really rather not talk about it yet .
What about the Rings ? "
" I 've got them all , " said Polly .
" Look , it 's all right , I 'm wearing gloves .
Let 's bury them . "
" Yes , let 's .
I 've marked the place where I buried the core of the Apple yesterday . "
Then Polly came over the wall and they went together to the place .
But , as it turned out , Digory need not have marked the place .
Something was already coming up .
It was not growing so that you could see it grow as the new trees had done in Narnia ; but it was already well above ground .
They got a trowel and buried all the magic rings in a circle round it .
About a week after this it was quite certain that Digory 's Mother was getting better .
About a fortnight later she was able to sit out in the garden .
And a month later that whole house had become a different place .
Aunt Letty did everything that Mother liked ; windows were opened , frowsy curtains were drawn back to brighten up the rooms , there were new flowers everywhere , and nicer things to eat , and the old piano was tuned and Mother took up her singing again , and had such games with Digory and Polly that Aunt Letty would say " I declare , Mabel , you 're the biggest baby of the three . "
When things go wrong , you 'll find they usually go on getting worse for some time ; but when things once start going right they often go on getting better and better .
After about six weeks of this lovely life there came a long letter from Father in India , which had wonderful news in it .
Old Great - Uncle Kirk had died and this meant , apparently , that Father was now very rich .
He was going to retire and come home from India forever and ever .
And the great big house in the country , which Digory had heard of all his life and never seen , would now be their home : the big house with the suits of armour , the stables , the kennels , the river , the park , the hot - houses , the vineries , the woods , and the mountains behind it .
So that Digory felt just as sure as you that they were all going to live happily ever after .
But perhaps you would like to know just one or two things more .
Polly and Digory were always great friends and she came nearly every holiday to stay with them at their beautiful house in the country ; and that was where she learned to ride and swim and milk and bake and climb .
In Narnia the Beasts lived in great peace and joy and neither the Witch nor any other enemy came to trouble that pleasant land for many hundred years .
King Frank and Queen Helen and their children lived happily in Narnia and their second son became King of Archenland .
The boys married nymphs and the girls married wood - gods and river - gods .
The lamp - post which the Witch had planted ( without knowing it ) shone day and night in the Narnian forest , so that the place where it grew came to be called Lantern Waste ; and when , hundreds of years later , another child from our world got into Narnia , on a snowy night , she found the light still burning .
And that adventure was , in a way , connected with the ones I have just been telling you .
It was like this .
The tree which sprang from the Apple that Digory planted in the back garden , lived and grew into a fine tree .
Growing in the soil of our world , far out of the sound of Aslan 's voice and far from the young air of Narnia , it did not bear apples that would revive a dying woman as Digory 's Mother had been revived , though it did bear apples more beautiful than any others in England , and they were extremely good for you , though not fully magical .
But inside itself , in the very sap of it , the tree ( so to speak ) never forgot that other tree in Narnia to which it belonged .
Sometimes it would move mysteriously when there was no wind blowing : I think that when this happened there were high winds in Narnia and the English tree quivered because , at that moment , the Narnian tree was rocking and swaying in a strong south western gale .
However , that might be , it was proved later that there was still magic in its wood .
For when Digory was quite middle aged ( and he was a famous learned man , a Professor , and a great traveller by that time ) and the Ketterleys ' old house belonged to him , there was a great storm all over the south of England which blew the tree down .
He could n't bear to have it simply chopped up for firewood , so he had part of the timber made into a wardrobe , which he put in his big house in the country .
And though he himself did not discover the magic properties of that wardrobe , someone else did .
That was the beginning of all the comings and going between Narnia and our world , which you can read of in other books .
When Digory and his people went to live in the big country house , they took Uncle Andrew to live with them ; for Digory 's Father said , " We must try to keep the old fellow out of mischief , and it is n't fair that poor Letty should have him always on her hands . "
Uncle Andrew never tried any Magic again as long as he lived .
He had learned his lesson , and in his old age he became a nicer and less selfish old man than he had ever been before .
But he always liked to get visitors alone in the billiard room and tell them stories about a mysterious lady , a foreign royalty , with whom he had driven about London .
" A devilish temper she had , " he would say .
" But she was a dem fine woman , sir , a dem fine woman . "