The children were facing one another across the pillar where the bell hung , still trembling , though it no longer gave out any note .
Suddenly they heard a soft noise from the end of the room which was still undamaged .
They turned quick as lightning to see what it was .
One of the robed figures , the furthest - off one of all , the woman whom Digory thought so beautiful , was rising from its chair .
When she stood up they realised that she was even taller than they had thought .
And you could see at once , not only from her crown and robes , but from the flash of her eyes and the curve of her lips , that she was a great queen .
She looked round the room and saw the damage and saw the children , but you could not guess from her face what she thought of either or whether she was surprised .
She came forward with long , swift strides .
" Who has awaked me ?
Who has broken the spell ? " she asked .
" I think it must have been me , " said Digory .
" You ! " said the Queen , laying her hand on his shoulder -- a white , beautiful hand , but Digory could feel that it was strong as steel pincers .
" You ?
But you are only a child , a common child .
Anyone can see at a glance that you have no drop of royal or noble blood in your veins .
How did such as you dare to enter this house ? "
" We 've come from another world ; by Magic , " said Polly , who thought it was high time the Queen took some notice of her as well as of Digory .
" Is this true ? " said the Queen , still looking at Digory and not giving Polly even a glance .
" Yes , it is , " said he .
The Queen put her other hand under his chin and forced it up so that she could see his face better .
Digory tried to stare back but he soon had to let his eyes drop .
There was something about hers that overpowered him .
After she had studied him for well over a minute , she let go of his chin and said :
" You are no magician .
The mark of it is not on you .
You must be only the servant of a magician .
It is on another 's Magic that you have travelled here . "
" It was my Uncle Andrew , " said Digory .
At the moment , not in the room itself but from somewhere very close , there came , first a rumbling , then a creaking , and then a roar of falling masonry , and the floor shook .
" There is great peril here , " said the Queen .
" The whole palace is breaking up .
If we are not out of it in a few minutes we shall be buried under the ruin . "
She spoke as calmly as if she had been merely mentioning the time of day .
" Come , " she added , and held out a hand to each of the children .
Polly , who was disliking the Queen and feeling sulky , would not have let her hand be taken if she could have helped it .
But though the Queen spoke so calmly , her movements were as quick as thought .
Before Polly knew what was happening her left hand had been caught in a hand so much longer and stronger than her own that she could do nothing about it .
" This is a terrible woman , " thought Polly .
" She 's strong enough to break my arm with one twist .
And now that she 's got my left hand I ca n't get at my yellow Ring .
If I tried to stretch across and get my right hand into my left pocket I might n't be able to reach it , before she asked me what I was doing .
Whatever happens we must n't let her know about the Rings .
I do hope Digory has the sense to keep his mouth shut .
I wish I could get a word with him alone . "
The Queen led them out of the Hall of Images into a long corridor and then through a whole maze of halls and stairs and courtyards .
Again and again they heard parts of the great palace collapsing , sometimes quite close to them .
Once a huge arch came thundering down only a moment after they had passed through it .
The Queen was walking quickly -- the children had to trot to keep up with her -- but she showed no sign of fear .
Digory thought , " She 's wonderfully brave .
And strong .
She 's what I call a Queen !
I do hope she 's going to tell us the story of this place . "
She did tell them certain things as they went along : " That is the door to the dungeons , " she would say , or " That passage leads to the principal torture chambers , " or " This was the old banqueting hall where my great - grandfather bade seven hundred nobles to a feast and killed them all before they had drunk their fill .
They had had rebellious thoughts . "
They came at last into a hall larger and loftier than any they had yet seen .
From its size and from the great doors at the far end , Digory thought that now at last they must be coming to the main entrance .
In this he was quite right .
The doors were dead black , either ebony or some black metal which is not found in our world .
They were fastened with great bars , most of them too high to reach and all too heavy to lift .
He wondered how they would get out .
The Queen let go of his hand and raised her arm .
She drew herself up to her full height and stood rigid .
Then she said something which they could n't understand ( but it sounded horrid ) and made an action as if she were throwing something towards the doors .
And those high and heavy doors trembled for a second as if they were made of silk and then crumbled away till there was nothing left of them but a heap of dust on the threshold .
" Whew ! " whistled Digory .
" Has your master magician , your uncle , power like mine ? " asked the Queen , firmly seizing Digory 's hand again .
" But I shall know later .
In the meantime , remember what you have seen .
This is what happens to things , and to people , who stand in my way . "
Much more light than they had yet seen in that country was pouring in through the now empty doorway , and when the Queen led them out through it they were not surprised to find themselves in the open air .
The wind that blew in their faces was cold , yet somehow stale .
They were looking from a high terrace and there was a great landscape spread out below them .
Low down and near the horizon hung a great , red sun , far bigger than our sun .
Digory felt at once that it was also older than ours : a sun near the end of its life , weary of looking down upon that world .
To the left of the sun , and higher up , there was a single star , big and bright .
Those were the only two things to be seen in the dark sky ; they made a dismal group .
And on the earth , in every direction , as far as the eye could reach , there spread a vast city in which there was no living thing to be seen .
And all the temples , towers , palaces , pyramids , and bridges cast long , disastrous - looking shadows in the light of that withered sun .
Once a great river had flowed through the city , but the water had long since vanished , and it was now only a wide ditch of grey dust .
" Look well on that which no eyes will ever see again , " said the Queen .
" Such was Charn , that great city , the city of the King of Kings , the wonder of the world , perhaps of all worlds .
Does your uncle rule any city as great as this , boy ? "
" No , " said Digory .
He was going to explain that Uncle Andrew did n't rule any cities , but the Queen went on :
" It is silent now .
But I have stood here when the whole air was full of the noises of Charn ; the trampling of feet , the creaking of wheels , the cracking of the whips and the groaning of slaves , the thunder of chariots , and the sacrificial drums beating in the temples .
I have stood here ( but that was near the end ) when the roar of battle went up from every street and the river of Charn ran red . "
She paused and added , " All in one moment one woman blotted it out forever . "
" Who ? " said Digory in a faint voice ; but he had already guessed the answer .
" I , " said the Queen .
" I , Jadis , the last Queen , but the Queen of the World . "
The two children stood silent , shivering in the cold wind .
" It was my sister 's fault , " said the Queen .
" She drove me to it .
May the curse of all the Powers rest upon her forever !
At any moment I was ready to make peace -- yes , and to spare her life too , if only she would yield me the throne .
But she would not .
Her pride has destroyed the whole world .
Even after the war had begun , there was a solemn promise that neither side would use Magic .
But when she broke her promise , what could I do ?
Fool !
As if she did not know that I had more Magic than she .
She even knew that I had the secret of the Deplorable Word .
Did she think -- she was always a weakling -- that I would not use it ? "
" What was it ? " said Digory .
" That was the secret of secrets , " said Queen Jadis .
" It had long been known to the great kings of our race that there was a word which , if spoken with the proper ceremonies , would destroy all living things except the one who spoke it .
But the ancient kings were weak and soft - hearted and bound themselves and all who should come after them with great oaths never even to seek after the knowledge of that word .
But I learned it in a secret place and paid a terrible price to learn it .
I did not use it until she forced me to it .
I fought and fought to over-come her by every other means .
I poured out the blood of my armies like water ---- "
" Beast ! " muttered Polly .
" The last great battle , " said the Queen , " raged for three days here in Charn itself .
For three days I looked down upon it from this very spot .
I did not use my power till the last of my soldiers had fallen , and the accursed woman , my sister , at the head of her rebels was half way up those great stairs that lead up from the city to the terrace .
Then I waited till we were so close that we could see one another 's faces .
She flashed her horrible , wicked eyes upon me and said , ' Victory .
' ' Yes , ' said I , ' Victory , but not yours .
' Then I spoke the Deplorable Word .
A moment later I was the only living thing beneath the sun . "
" But the people ? " gasped Digory .
" What people , boy ? " asked the Queen .
" All the ordinary people , " said Polly , " who 'd never done you any harm .
And the women , and the children , and the animals . "
" Do n't you understand ? " said the Queen ( still speaking to Digory ) .
" I was the Queen .
They were all _my_ people .
What else were they there for but to do my will . "
" It was rather hard luck on them , all the same , " said he .
" I had forgotten that you are only a common boy .
How should you understand reasons of State ?
You must learn , child , that what would be wrong for you or for any of the common people is not wrong in a great Queen such as I. The weight of the world is on our shoulders .
We must be freed from all rules .
Ours is a high and lonely destiny . "
Digory suddenly remembered that Uncle Andrew had used exactly the same words .
But they sounded much grander when Queen Jadis said them ; perhaps because Uncle Andrew was not seven feet tall and dazzlingly beautiful .
" And what did you do then ? " said Digory .
" I had already cast strong spells on the hall where the images of my ancestors sit .
And the force of those spells was that I should sleep among them , like an image myself , and need neither food nor fire , though it were a thousand years , till one came and struck the bell and awoke me . "
" Was it the Deplorable Word that made the sun like that ? " asked Digory .
" Like what ? " said Jadis .
" So big , so red , and so cold . "
" It has always been so , " said Jadis .
" At least , for hundreds of thousands of years .
Have you a different sort of sun in your world ? "
" Yes , it 's smaller and yellower .
And it gives a good deal more heat . "
The Queen gave a long drawn " A -- a -- ah ! "
And Digory saw on her face that same hungry and greedy look which he had lately seen on Uncle Andrew 's .
" So , " she said , " yours is a younger world . "
She paused for a moment to look once more at the deserted city -- and if she was sorry for all the evil she had done , she certainly did n't show it -- and then said :
" Now , let us be going .
It is cold here at the end of all the ages . "
" Going where ? " asked both the children .
" Where ? " repeated Jadis in surprise .
" To your world , of course . "
Polly and Digory looked at each other , aghast .
Polly had disliked the Queen from the first ; and even Digory , now that he had heard the story , felt that he had seen quite as much of her as he wanted .
Certainly , she was not at all the sort of person one would like to take home .
And if they did like , they did n't know how they could .
What they wanted was to get away themselves : but Polly could n't get at her Ring and of course Digory could n't go without her .
Digory got very red in the face and stammered .
" Oh -- oh -- our world .
I d -- did n't know you wanted to go there . "
" What else were you sent for if not to fetch me ? " asked Jadis .
" I 'm sure you would n't like our world at all , " said Digory .
" It 's not her sort of place , is it Polly ?
It 's very dull ; not worth seeing , really . "
" It will soon be worth seeing when I rule it , " answered the Queen .
" Oh , but you ca n't , " said Digory .
" It 's not like that .
They would n't let you , you know . "
The Queen gave a contemptuous smile .
" Many great kings , " she said , " thought they could stand against the House of Charn .
But they all fell , and their very names are forgotten .
Foolish boy !
Do you think that I , with my beauty and my Magic , will not have your whole world at my feet before a year has passed ?
Prepare your incantations and take me there at once . "
" This is perfectly frightful , " said Digory to Polly .
" Perhaps you fear for this Uncle of yours , " said Jadis .
" But if he honours me duly , he shall keep his life and his throne .
I am not coming to fight against _him_ .
He must be a very great Magician , if he has found how to send you here .
Is he King of your whole world or only of part ? "
" He is n't King of anywhere , " said Digory .
" You are lying , " said the Queen .
" Does not Magic always go with the royal blood ?
Who ever heard of common people being Magicians ?
I can see the truth whether you speak it or not .
Your Uncle is the great King and the great Enchanter of your world .
And by his art he has seen the shadow of my face , in some magic mirror or some enchanted pool ; and for the love of my beauty he has made a potent spell which shook your world to its foundations and sent you across the vast gulf between world and world to ask my favour and to bring me to him .
Answer me : is that not how it was ? "
" Well , not _exactly_ , " said Digory .
" Not exactly , " shouted Polly .
" Why , it 's absolute bosh from beginning to end . "
" Minion ! " cried the Queen , turning in rage upon Polly and seizing her hair , at the very top of her head where it hurts most .
But in so doing she let go of both the children 's hands .
" Now , " shouted Digory ; and " Quick ! " shouted Polly .
They plunged their left hands into their pockets .
They did not even need to put the Rings on .
The moment they touched them , the whole of that dreary world vanished from their eyes .
They were rushing upward and a warm green light was growing nearer overhead .