" Now , slave , how long am I to wait for my chariot ? " thundered the Witch .
Uncle Andrew cowered away from her .
Now that she was really present , all the silly thoughts he had had while looking at himself in the glass were oozing out of him .
But Aunt Letty at once got up from her knees and came over to the centre of the room .
" And who is this young person , Andrew , may I ask ? " said Aunt Letty in icy tones .
" Distinguished foreigner ---- v -- very important p -- person , " he stammered .
" Rubbish ! " said Aunt Letty , and then , turning to the Witch , " get out of my house this moment , you shameless hussy , or I 'll send for the police . "
She thought the Witch must be someone out of a circus and she did not approve of bare arms .
" What woman is this ? " said Jadis .
" Down on your knees , minion , before I blast you . "
" No strong language in this house _if_ you please , young woman , " said Aunt Letty .
Instantly , as it seemed to Uncle Andrew , the Queen towered up to an even greater height .
Fire flashed from her eyes : she flung out her arm with the same gesture and the same horrible - sounding words that had lately turned the palace - gates of Charn to dust .
But nothing happened except that Aunt Letty , thinking that those horrible words were meant to be English , said :
" I thought as much .
The woman is drunk .
Drunk !
She ca n't even speak clearly . "
It must have been a terrible moment for the Witch when she suddenly realised that her power of turning people into dust , which had been quite real in her own world , was not going to work in ours .
But she did not lose her nerve even for a second .
Without wasting a thought on her disappointment , she lunged forward , caught Aunt Letty round the neck and the knees , raised her high above her head as if she had been no heavier than a doll , and threw her across the room .
While Aunt Letty was still hurtling through the air , the housemaid ( who was having a beautifully exciting morning ) put her head in at the door and said , " If you please , sir , the ' ansom 's come . "
" Lead on , Slave , " said the Witch to Uncle Andrew .
He began muttering something about " regrettable violence -- must really protest , " but at a single glance from Jadis he became speechless .
She drove him out of the room and out of the house ; and Digory came running down the stairs just in time to see the front door close behind them .
" Jiminy ! " he said .
" She 's loose in London .
And with Uncle Andrew .
I wonder what on earth is going to happen now . "
" Oh , Master Digory , " said the housemaid ( who was really having a wonderful day ) , " I think Miss Ketterley 's hurt herself somehow . "
So they both rushed into the drawing room to find out what had happened .
If Aunt Letty had fallen on bare boards or even on the carpet , I suppose all her bones would have been broken : but by great good luck she had fallen on the mattress .
Aunt Letty was a very tough old lady : aunts often were in those days .
After she had had some _sal volatile_ and sat still for a few minutes , she said there was nothing the matter with her except a few bruises .
Very soon she was taking charge of the situation .
" Sarah , " she said to the housemaid ( who had never had such a day before ) , " go around to the police station at once and tell them there is a dangerous lunatic at large .
I will take Mrs. Kirke 's lunch up myself . "
Mrs. Kirke was , of course , Digory 's mother .
When Mother 's lunch had been seen to , Digory and Aunt Letty had their own .
After that he did some hard thinking .
The problem was how to get the Witch back to her own world , or at any rate out of ours , as soon as possible .
Whatever happened , she must not be allowed to go rampaging about the house .
Mother must not see her .
And , if possible , she must not be allowed to go rampaging about London either .
Digory had not been in the drawing room when she tried to " blast " Aunt Letty , but he had seen her " blast " the gates at Charn : so he knew her terrible powers and did not know that she had lost any of them by coming into our world .
And he knew she meant to conquer our world .
At the present moment , as far as he could see , she might be blasting Buckingham Palace or the Houses of Parliament : and it was almost certain that quite a number of policemen had by now been reduced to little heaps of dust .
And there did n't seem to be anything he could do about that .
" But the Rings seem to work like magnets , " thought Digory .
" If I can only touch her and then slip on my yellow , we shall both go into the Wood between the Worlds .
I wonder will she go all faint again there ?
Was that something the place does to her , or was it only the shock of being pulled out of her own world ?
But I suppose I 'll have to risk that .
And how am I to find the beast ?
I do n't suppose Aunt Letty would let me go out , not unless I said where I was going .
And I have n't got more than twopence .
I 'd need any amount of money for buses and trams if I went looking all over London .
Anyway , I have n't the faintest idea where to look .
I wonder if Uncle Andrew is still with her . "
It seemed in the end that the only thing he could do was to wait and hope that Uncle Andrew and the Witch would come back .
If they did , he must rush out and get hold of the Witch and put on his yellow Ring before she had a chance to get into the house .
This meant that he must watch the front door like a cat watching a mouse 's hole ; he dared not leave his post for a moment .
So he went into the dining room and " glued his face " as they say , to the window .
It was a bow - window from which you could see the steps up to the front door and see up and down the street , so that no - one could reach the front door without your knowing .
" I wonder what Polly 's doing ? " thought Digory .
He wondered about this a good deal as the first slow half - hour ticked on .
But you need not wonder , for I am going to tell you .
She had got home late for her dinner , with her shoes and stockings very wet .
And when they asked her where she had been and what on earth she had been doing , she said she had been out with Digory Kirke .
Under further questioning she said she had got her feet wet in a pool of water , and that the pool was in a wood .
Asked where the wood was , she said she did n't know .
Asked if it was in one of the parks , she said truthfully enough that she supposed it might be a sort of park .
From all of this Polly 's mother got the idea that Polly had gone off , without telling anyone , to some part of London she did n't know , and gone into a strange park and amused herself jumping into puddles .
As a result she was told that she had been very naughty indeed and that she would n't be allowed to play with " that Kirke boy " any more if anything of the sort ever happened again .
Then she was given dinner with all the nice parts left out and sent to bed for two solid hours .
It was a thing that happened to one quite often in those days .
So while Digory was staring out of the dining room window , Polly was lying in bed , and both were thinking how terribly slowly the time could go .
I think , myself , I would rather have been in Polly 's position .
She had only to wait for the end of her two hours : but every few minutes Digory would hear a cab or a baker 's van or a butcher 's boy coming round the corner and think " Here she comes , " and then find it was n't .
And in between these false alarms , for what seemed hours and hours , the clock ticked on and one big fly -- high up and far out of reach -- buzzed against the window .
It one of those houses that get very quiet and dull in the afternoon and always seem to smell of mutton .
During his long watching and waiting one small thing happened which I shall have to mention because something important came of it later on .
A lady called with some grapes for Digory 's Mother ; and as the dining room door was open , Digory could n't help overhearing Aunt Letty and the lady as they talked in the hall .
" What lovely grapes ! " came Aunt Letty 's voice .
" I 'm sure if anything could do her good these would .
But poor , dear little Mabel !
I 'm afraid it would need fruit from the land of youth to help her now .
Nothing in this world will do much . "
Then they both lowered their voices and said a lot more that he could not hear .
If he had heard that bit about the land of youth a few days ago he would have thought Aunt Letty was just talking without meaning anything in particular , the way grown - ups do , and it would n't have interested him .
He almost thought so now .
But suddenly it flashed upon his mind that he now knew ( even if Aunt Letty did n't ) that there really were other worlds and that he himself had been in one of them .
At that rate there might be a real Land of Youth somewhere .
There might be almost anything .
There might be fruit in some other world that would really cure his mother !
And oh , oh ---- Well , you know how it feels if you begin hoping for something that you want desperately badly ; you almost fight against the hope because it is too good to be true ; you 've been disappointed so often before .
That was how Digory felt .
But it was no good trying to throttle this hope .
It might -- really , really , it just might be true .
So many odd things had happened already .
And he had the magic Rings .
There must be worlds you could get to through every pool in the wood .
He could hunt through them all .
And then ---- _Mother well again_ .
Everything right again .
He forgot all about watching for the Witch .
His hand was already going into the pocket where he kept the yellow Ring , when all at once he heard a sound of galloping .
" Hullo !
What 's that ? " thought Digory .
" Fire - engine ?
I wonder what house is on fire .
Great Scott , it 's coming here .
Why , it 's Her . "
I need n't tell you who he meant by _Her_ .
First came the hansom .
There was no one in the driver 's seat .
On the roof -- not sitting , but standing on the roof -- swaying with superb balance as it came at full speed round the corner with one wheel in the air -- was Jadis the Queen of Queens and the Terror of Charn .
Her teeth were bared , her eyes shone like fire , and her long hair streamed out behind her like a comet 's tail .
She was flogging the horse without mercy .
Its nostrils were wide and red and its sides were spotted with foam .
It galloped madly up to the front door , missing the lamp - post by an inch , and then reared up on its hind legs .
The hansom crashed into the lamp - post and shattered into several pieces .
The Witch , with a magnificent jump , had sprung clear just in time and landed on the horse 's back .
She settled herself astride and leaned forward , whispering things in its ear .
They must have been things meant not to quiet it but to madden it .
It was on its hind legs again in a moment , and its neigh was like a scream ; it was all hoofs and teeth and eyes and tossing mane .
Only a splendid rider could have stayed on its back .
Before Digory had recovered his breath a good many other things began to happen .
A second hansom dashed up close behind the first : out of it there jumped a fat man in a frock - coat and a policeman .
Then came a third hansom with two more policemen in it .
After it , came about twenty people ( mostly errand boys ) on bicycles , all ringing their bells and letting out cheers and catcalls .
Last of all came a crowd of people on foot : all very hot with running , but obviously enjoying themselves .
Windows shot up in all the houses of that street and a housemaid or a butler appeared at every front door .
They wanted to see the fun .
Meanwhile an old gentleman had begun to struggle shakily out of the ruins of the hansom .
Several people rushed forward to help him ; but as one pulled him one way and another another , perhaps he would have got out quite as quickly on his own .
Digory guessed that the old gentleman must be Uncle Andrew but you could n't see his face ; his tall hat had been bashed down over it .
Digory rushed out and joined the crowd .
" That 's the woman , that 's the woman , " cried the fat man , pointing at Jadis .
" Do your duty , Constable .
Hundreds and thousands of pounds worth she 's taken out of my shop .
Look at that rope of pearls round her neck .
That 's mine .
And she 's given me a black eye too , what 's more . "
" That she ' as guv'nor , " said one to the crowd .
" And as lovely a black eye as I 'd wish to see .
Beautiful bit of work that must ' ave been .
Gor ! ai n't she strong then ! "
" You ought to put a nice raw beefsteak on it , Mister , that 's what it wants , " said a butcher 's boy .
" Now then , " said the most important of the policemen , " what 's all this ' ere ? "
" I tell you she ---- " began the fat man , when someone else called out :
" Do n't let the old cove in the cab get away .
' E put ' er up to it . "
The old gentleman , who was certainly Uncle Andrew , had just succeeded in standing up and was rubbing his bruises .
" Now then , " said the policeman , turning to him , " What 's all this ? "
" Womfle -- pomfy -- shomf , " came Uncle Andrew 's voice from inside the hat .
" None of that now , " said the policeman sternly .
" You 'll find this is no laughing matter .
Take that ' at off , see ? "
This was more easily said than done .
But after Uncle Andrew had struggled in vain with the hat for some time , two other policemen seized it by the brim and forced it off .
" Thank you , thank you , " said Uncle Andrew in a faint voice .
" Thank you .
Dear me , I 'm terribly shaken .
If someone could give me a small glass of brandy ---- "
" Now you attend to me , if you please , " said the policeman , taking out a very large note - book and a very small pencil .
" Are you in charge of that there young woman ? "
" Look out ! " called several voices , and the policeman jumped a step backwards just in time .
The horse had aimed to kick at him which would probably have killed him .
Then the Witch wheeled the horse round so that she faced the crowd and its hind-legs were on the footpath .
She had a long , bright knife in her hand and had been busily cutting the horse free from the wreck of the hansom .
All this time Digory had been trying to get into a position from which he could touch the Witch .
This was n't at all easy because , on the side nearest to him , there were too many people .
And in order to get round to the other side he had to pass between the horse 's hoofs and the railings of the " area " that surrounded the house ; for the Ketterley 's house had a basement .
If you know anything about horses , and especially if you had seen what a state that horse was in at the moment , you will realise that this was a ticklish thing to do .
Digory knew lots about horses , but he set his teeth and got ready to make a dash for it as soon as he saw a favourable moment .
A red - faced man in a bowler hat had now shouldered his way to the front of the crowd .
" Hi !
P'leeceman , " he said , " that 's my ' orse what she 's sitting on , same as it 's my cab what she 's made matchwood of . "
" One at a time , please , one at a time , " said the policeman .
" But there ai n't no time , " said the Cabby .
" I know that ' orse better'n you do .
' Taint an ordinary ' orse .
' Is father was a hofficer 's charger in the cavalry , ' e was .
And if the young woman goes on hexciting ' im , there 'll be murder done .
' Ere , let me get at him . "
The policeman was only too glad to have a good reason for standing further away from the horse .
The Cabby took a step nearer , looked up at Jadis , and said in a not unkindly voice :
" Now , Missie , let me get at ' is ' ead , and just you get off .
You 're a Lidy , and you do n't want all these roughs going for you , do you ?
You want to go ' ome and ' ave a nice cup of tea and a lay down quiet like ; then you 'll feel ever so much better . "
At the same time he stretched out his hand towards the horse 's head with the words , " Steady , Strawberry , old boy .
Steady now . "
Then for the first time the Witch spoke .
" Dog ! " came her cold , clear voice , ringing loud above all the other noises .
" Dog , unhand our royal charger .
We are the Empress Jadis . "