" Ho !
Hempress , are you ?
We 'll see about that , " said a voice .
Then another voice said , " Three cheers for the Hempress of Colney ' Atch " and quite a number joined in .
A flush of colour came into the Witch 's face and she bowed ever so slightly .
But the cheers died away into roars of laughter and she saw that they had only been making fun of her .
A change came over her expression and she changed the knife to her left hand .
Then , without warning , she did a thing that was dreadful to see .
Lightly , easily , as if it were the most ordinary thing in the world , she stretched up her right arm and wrenched off one of the cross-bars of the lamp - post .
If she had lost some magical powers in our world , she had not lost her strength ; she could break an iron bar as if it were a stick of barley - sugar .
She tossed her new weapon up in the air , caught it again , brandished it , and urged the horse forward .
" Now 's my chance , " thought Digory .
He darted between the horse and the railings and began going forward .
If only the brute would stay still for a moment he might catch the Witch 's heel .
As he rushed , he heard a sickening crash and a thud .
The Witch had brought the bar down on the chief policeman 's helmet : the man fell like a ninepin .
" Quick , Digory .
This _must_ be stopped , " said a voice beside him .
It was Polly , who had rushed down the moment she was allowed out of bed .
" You are a brick , " said Digory .
" Hold on to me tight .
You 'll have to manage the Ring .
Yellow , remember .
And do n't put it on till I shout . "
There was a second crash and another policeman crumpled up .
There came an angry roar from the crowd : " Pull her down .
Get a few paving - stones .
Call out the Military . "
But most of them were getting as far away as they could .
The Cabby , however , obviously the bravest as well as the kindest person present , was keeping close to the horse , dodging this way and that to avoid the bar , but still trying to catch Strawberry 's head .
The crowd booed and bellowed again .
A stone whistled over Digory 's head .
Then came the voice of the Witch , clear like a great bell , and sounding as if , for once , she were almost happy .
" Scum !
You shall pay dearly for this when I have conquered your world .
Not one stone of your city will be left .
I will make it as Charn , as Felinda , as Sorlois , as Bramandin . "
Digory at last caught her ankle .
She kicked back with her heel and hit him in the mouth .
In his pain he lost hold .
His lip was cut and his mouth full of blood .
From somewhere very close by came the voice of Uncle Andrew in a sort of trembling scream .
" Madam -- my dear young lady -- for heaven 's sake ---- compose yourself . "
Digory made a second grab at her heel , and was again shaken off .
More men were knocked down by the iron bar .
He made a third grab : caught the heel : held on like grim death , shouting to Polly " Go ! " then ----
Oh , thank goodness .
The angry , frightened faces had vanished .
The angry , frightened voices were silenced .
All except Uncle Andrew 's .
Close beside Digory in the darkness , it was wailing on : " Oh , oh , is this delirium ?
Is it the end ?
I ca n't bear it .
It 's not fair .
I never meant to be a Magician .
It 's all a misunderstanding .
It 's all my godmother 's fault ; I must protest against this .
In my state of health too .
A very old Dorsetshire family . "
" Bother ! " thought Digory .
" We did n't want to bring him along .
My hat , what a picnic .
Are you there , Polly ? "
" Yes , I 'm here .
Do n't keep on shoving . "
" I 'm not , " began Digory , but before he could say anything more , their heads came out into the warm , green sunshine of the wood .
And as they stepped out of the pool Polly cried out :
" Oh look !
We 've brought the old horse with us too .
_And_ Mr. Ketterley .
_And_ the Cabby .
This is a pretty kettle of fish ! "
As soon as the Witch saw that she was once more in the wood she turned pale and bent down till her face touched the mane of the horse .
You could see she felt deadly sick .
Uncle Andrew was shivering .
But Strawberry , the horse , shook his head , gave a cheerful whinny , and seemed to feel better .
He became quiet for the first time since Digory had seen him .
His ears , which had been laid flat back on his skull , came into their proper position , and the fire went out of his eyes .
" That 's right , old boy , " said the Cabby , clapping Strawberry 's neck .
" That 's better .
Take it easy . "
Strawberry did the most natural thing in the world .
Being very thirsty ( and no wonder ) he walked slowly across to the nearest pool and stepped into it to have a drink .
Digory was still holding the Witch 's heel and Polly was holding Digory 's hand .
One of the Cabby 's hands was on Strawberry ; and Uncle Andrew , still very shaky , had just grabbed on the Cabby 's other hand .
" Quick , " said Polly , with a look at Digory .
" Greens ! "
So the horse never got his drink .
Instead , the whole party found themselves sinking into darkness .
Strawberry neighed ; Uncle Andrew whimpered .
Digory said , " That was a bit of luck . "
There was a short pause .
Then Polly said , " Ought n't we to be nearly there now ? "
" We do seem to be somewhere , " said Digory .
" At least I 'm standing on something solid . "
" Why , so am I , now that I come to think of it , " said Polly .
" But why 's it so dark ?
I say , do you think we got into the wrong pool ? "
" Perhaps this is Charn , " said Digory .
" Only we 've got back in the middle of the night . "
" This is not Charn , " came the Witch 's voice .
" This is an empty world .
This is Nothing . "
And really it was uncommonly like Nothing .
There were no stars .
It was so dark that they could n't see one another at all and it made no difference whether you kept your eyes shut or opened .
Under their feet there was a cool , flat something which might have been earth , and was certainly not grass or wood .
The air was cold and dry and there was no wind .
" My doom has come upon me , " said the Witch in a voice of horrible calmness .
" Oh do n't say that , " babbled Uncle Andrew .
" My dear young lady , pray do n't say such things .
It ca n't be as bad as that .
Ah -- Cabman -- my good man -- you do n't happen to have a flask about you ?
A drop of spirits is just what I need . "
" Now then , now then , " came the Cabby 's voice , a good , firm , hardy voice , " keep cool everyone , that 's what I say .
No bones broken , anyone ?
Good .
Well there 's something to be thankful for straight away , and more than anyone could expect after falling all that way .
Now , if we 've fallen down some diggings -- as it might be for a new station on the Underground -- someone will come and get us out presently , see !
And if we 're dead -- which I do n't deny it might be -- well , you got to remember that worse things ' appen at sea and a chap 's got to die sometime .
And there ai n't nothing to be afraid of if a chap 's led a decent life .
And if you ask me , I think the best thing we could do to pass the time would be to sing a ' ymn . "
And he did .
He struck up at once a harvest thanksgiving hymn , all about crops being " safely gathered in . "
It was not very suitable to a place which felt as if nothing had ever grown there since the beginning of time , but it was the one he could remember best .
He had a fine voice and the children joined in ; it was very cheering .
Uncle Andrew and the Witch did not join in .
Towards the end of the hymn Digory felt someone plucking at his elbow and from a general smell of brandy and cigars and good clothes he decided that it must be Uncle Andrew .
Uncle Andrew was cautiously pulling him away from the others .
When they had gone a little distance , the old man put his mouth so close to Digory 's ear that it tickled , and whispered :
" Now , my boy .
Slip on your Ring .
Let 's be off . "
But the Witch had very good ears .
" Fool ! " came her voice .
" Have you forgotten that I can hear men 's thoughts ?
Let go the boy .
If you attempt treachery I will take such vengeance upon you as never was heard of in all worlds from the beginning . "
" And , " added Digory , " if you think I 'm such a mean pig as to go off and leave Polly -- and the Cabby -- and the horse -- in a place like this , you 're jolly well mistaken . "
" You are a very naughty and impertinent little boy , " said Uncle Andrew .
" Hush ! " said the Cabby .
They all listened .
In the darkness something was happening at last .
A voice had begun to sing .
It was very far away and Digory found it hard to decide from what direction it was coming .
Sometimes it seemed to come from all directions at once .
Sometimes he almost thought it was coming out of the earth beneath them .
Its lower notes were deep enough to be the voice of the earth herself .
There were no words .
There was hardly even a tune .
But it was , beyond comparison , the most beautiful noise he had ever heard .
It was so beautiful he could hardly bear it .
The horse seemed to like it too : he gave the sort of whinny a horse would give if , after years of being a cab - horse , it found itself back in the old field where it had played as a foal , and saw someone whom it remembered and loved coming across the field to bring it a lump of sugar .
" Gawd ! " said the Cabby .
" Ai n't it lovely ? "
Then two wonders happened at the same moment .
One was that the voice was suddenly joined by other voices ; more voices than you could possibly count .
They were in harmony with it , but far higher up the scale : cold , tingling , silvery voices .
The second wonder was that the blackness overhead , all at once , was blazing with stars .
They did n't come out gently one by one , as they do on a summer evening .
One moment there had been nothing but darkness ; next moment a thousand , thousand points of light leaped out -- single stars , constellations , and planets , brighter and bigger than any in our world .
There were no clouds .
The new stars and the new voices began at exactly the same time .
If you had seen and heard it , as Digory did , you would have felt quite certain that it was the stars themselves who were singing , and that it was the First Voice , the deep one , which had made them appear and made them sing .
" Glory be ! " said the Cabby .
" I 'd ha ' been a better man all my life if I 'd known there were things like this . "
The Voice on the earth was now louder and more triumphant ; but the voices in the sky , after singing loudly with it for a time , began to get fainter .
And now something else was happening .
Far away , and down near the horizon , the sky began to turn grey .
A light wind , very fresh , began to stir .
The sky , in that one place , grew slowly and steadily paler .
You could see shapes of hills standing up dark against it .
All the time the Voice went on singing .
There was soon light enough for them to see one another 's faces .
The Cabby and the two children had open mouths and shining eyes ; they were drinking in the sound , and they looked as if it reminded them of something .
Uncle Andrew 's mouth was open too , but not open with joy .
He looked more as if his chin had simply dropped away from the rest of his face .
His shoulders were stooped and his knees shook .
He was not liking the Voice .
If he could have got away from it by creeping into a rat 's hole , he would have done so .
But the Witch looked as if , in a way , she understood the music better than any of them .
Her mouth was shut , her lips were pressed together , and her fists were clenched .
Ever since the song began she had felt that this whole world was filled with a Magic different from hers and stronger .
She hated it .
She would have smashed that whole world , or all worlds , to pieces , if it would only stop the singing .
The horse stood with its ears well forward , and twitching .
Every now and then it snorted and stamped the ground .
It no longer looked like a tired old cab - horse ; you could now well believe that its father had been in battles .
The eastern sky changed from white to pink and from pink to gold .
The Voice rose and rose , till all the air was shaking with it .
And just as it swelled to the mightiest and most glorious sound it had yet produced , the sun arose .
Digory had never seen such a sun .
The sun above the ruins of Charn had looked older than ours : this looked younger .
You could imagine that it laughed for joy as it came up .
And as its beams shot across the land the travellers could see for the first time what sort of place they were in .
It was a valley through which a broad , swift river wound its way , flowing eastward towards the sun .
Southward there were mountains , northward there were lower hills .
But it was a valley of mere earth , rock and water ; there was not a tree , not a bush , not a blade of grass to be seen .
The earth was of many colours : they were fresh , hot and vivid .
They made you feel excited ; until you saw the Singer himself , and then you forgot everything else .
It was a Lion .
Huge , shaggy , and bright it stood facing the risen sun .
Its mouth was wide open in song and it was about three hundred yards away .
" This is a terrible world , " said the Witch .
" We must fly at once .
Prepare the Magic . "
" I quite agree with you , Madam , " said Uncle Andrew .
" A most disagreeable place .
Completely uncivilised .
If only I were a younger man and had a gun ---- "
" Garn ! " said the Cabby .
" You do n't think you could shoot ' im , do you ? "
" And who _would_ ? " said Polly .
" Prepare the Magic , old fool , " said Jadis .
" Certainly , Madam , " said Uncle Andrew cunningly .
" I must have both the children touching me .
Put on your homeward Ring at once , Digory . "
He wanted to get away without the Witch .
" Oh , it 's _rings_ , is it ? " cried Jadis , leaping off the horse .
She would have had her hands in Digory 's pocket before you could say knife , but Digory grabbed Polly and shouted out :
" Take care .
If either of you come half an inch nearer , we two will vanish and you 'll be left here for good .
Yes : I have a Ring in my pocket that will take Polly and me home .
And look !
My hand is just ready .
So keep your distance .
I 'm sorry about you ( he looked at the Cabby ) and about the horse , but I ca n't help that .
As for you two ( he looked at Uncle Andrew and the Queen ) , you 're both magicians , so you ought to enjoy living together . "
" ' Old your noise , everyone , " said the Cabby .
" I want to listen to the moosic . "
For the Song had now changed .