It was of course the Lion 's voice .
The children had long felt sure that he could speak : yet it was a lovely and terrible shock when he did .
Out of the trees wild people stepped forth , gods and goddesses of the wood ; with them came Fauns and Satyrs and Dwarfs .
Out of the river rose the river god with his Naiad daughters .
And all these and all the beasts and birds in their different voices , low or high or thick or clear , replied :
" Hail , Aslan .
We hear and obey .
We are awake .
We love .
We think .
We speak .
We know . "
" But , please , we do n't know very much yet , " said a nosey and snorty kind of voice .
And that really did make the children jump , for it was the cab - horse who had spoken .
" Good old Strawberry , " said Polly .
" I _am_ glad he was one of the ones picked out to be a Talking beast . "
And the Cabby , who was now standing beside the children , said , " Strike me pink .
I always did say as that ' oss ' ad a lot of sense , though . "
" Creatures , I give you yourselves , " said the strong , happy voice of Aslan .
" I give to you forever this land of Narnia .
I give you the woods , the fruits , the rivers .
I give you the stars and I give you myself .
The Dumb Beasts whom I have not chosen are yours also .
Treat them gently and cherish them but do not go back to their ways lest you cease to be Talking Beasts .
For out of them you were taken and into them you can return .
Do not so . "
" No , Aslan , we wo n't , we wo n't , " said everyone .
But one perky jackdaw added in a loud voice , " No fear ! " and everyone else had finished just before he said it so that his words came out quite clear in a dead silence ; and perhaps you have found out how awful that can be -- say , at a party .
The Jackdaw became so embarrassed that it hid its head under its wing as if it was going to sleep .
And all the other animals began making various queer noises which are their way of laughing and which , of course , no one has ever heard in our world .
They tried at first to repress it , but Aslan said :
" Laugh and fear not , creatures .
Now that you are no longer dumb and witless , you need not always be grave .
For jokes as well as justice come in with speech . "
So they all let themselves go .
And there was such merriment that the Jackdaw himself plucked up courage again and perched on the cab - horse 's head , between its ears , clapping its wings , and said :
" Aslan !
Aslan !
Have I made the first joke ?
Will everybody always be told how I made the first joke ? "
" No , little friend , " said the Lion .
" You have not _made_ the first joke ; you have only _been_ the first joke . "
Then everyone laughed more than ever ; but the Jackdaw did n't mind and laughed just as loud till the horse shook its head and the Jackdaw lost its balance and fell off , but remembered its wings ( they were still new to it ) before it reached the ground .
" And now , " said Aslan , " Narnia is established .
We must next take thought for keeping it safe .
I will call some of you to my council .
Come hither to me , you the chief Dwarf , and you the River - god , and you Oak and the He - Owl , and both the Ravens and the Bull - Elephant .
We must talk together .
For though the world is not five hours old an evil has already entered it . "
The creatures he had named came forward and he turned away eastward with them .
The others all began talking , saying things like " _What_ did he say had entered the world ?
-- A Neevil -- What 's a Neevil ?
-- No , he did n't say a Neevil , he said a weevil -- Well , what 's that ? "
" Look here , " said Digory to Polly , " I 've got to go after him -- Aslan , I mean , the Lion .
I must speak to him . "
" Do you think we can ? " said Polly .
" I would n't dare . "
" I 've got to , " said Digory .
" It 's about Mother .
If anyone could give me something that would do her good , it would be him . "
" I 'll come along with you , " said the Cabby .
" I liked the looks of _ ' im_ .
And I do n't reckon these other beasts will go for us .
And I want a word with old Strawberry . "
So all three of them stepped out boldly -- or as boldly as they could -- towards the assembly of animals .
The creatures were so busy talking to one another and making friends that they did n't notice the three humans until they were very close ; nor did they hear Uncle Andrew , who was standing trembling in his buttoned boots a good way off and shouting ( but by no means at the top of his voice ) .
" Digory !
Come back !
Come back at once when you 're told .
I forbid you to go a step further . "
When at last they were right in among the animals , the animals all stopped talking and stared at them .
" Well ? " said the He - Beaver at least , " What , in the name of Aslan are these ? "
" Please , " began Digory in rather a breathless voice , when a Rabbit said , " They 're a kind of large lettuce , that 's my belief . "
" No , we 're not , honestly we 're not , " said Polly hastily .
" We 're not at all nice to eat . "
" There ! " said the Mole .
" They can talk .
Who ever heard of a talking lettuce ? "
" Perhaps they 're the Second Joke , " suggested the Jackdaw .
A Panther , which had been washing its face , stopped for a moment to say , " Well , if they are , they 're nothing like so good as the first one .
At least , _I_ do n't see anything very funny about them . "
It yawned and went on with its wash .
" Oh , please , " said Digory .
" I 'm in such a hurry .
I want to see the Lion . "
All this time the Cabby had been trying to catch Strawberry 's eye .
Now he did .
" Now , Strawberry , old boy , " he said .
" You know me .
You ai n't going to stand there and say as you do n't know me . "
" What 's the Thing talking about , Horse ? " said several voices .
" Well , " said Strawberry very slowly , " I do n't exactly know .
I think most of us do n't know much about anything yet .
But I 've a sort of idea I 've seen a thing like this before .
I 've a feeling I lived somewhere else -- or was something else -- before Aslan woke us all up a few minutes ago .
It 's all very muddled .
Like a dream .
But there were things like these three in the dream . "
" What ? " said the Cabby .
" Not know me ?
Me what used to bring you a hot mash of an evening when you was out of sorts ?
Me what rubbed you down proper ?
Me what never forgot to put your cloth on you if you was standing in the cold ?
I would n't ' ave thought it of you , Strawberry . "
" It _does_ begin to come back , " said the Horse thoughtfully .
" Yes .
Let me think now , let me think .
Yes , you used to tie a horrid black thing behind me and then hit me to make me run , and however far I ran this black thing would always be coming rattle - rattle behind me . "
" We ' ad our living to earn , see , " said the Cabby .
" Yours the same as mine .
And if there ' ad n't been no work and no whip ther 'd ' ave been no stable , no hay , no mash , and no oats .
For you did get a taste of oats when I could afford 'em , which no one can deny . "
" Oats ? " said the Horse , pricking up his ears .
" Yes , I remember something about that .
Yes .
I remember more and more .
You were always sitting up somewhere behind , and I was always running in front , pulling you and the black thing .
I know I did all the work . "
" Summer , I grant you , " said the Cabby .
" ' Ot work for you and a cool seat for me .
But what about winter , old boy , when you was keeping yourself warm and I was sitting up there with my feet like ice and my nose fair pinched off me with the wind , and my ' ands that numb I could n't ' ardly ' old the reins ? "
" It was a hard , cruel country , " said Strawberry .
" There was no grass .
All hard stones . "
" Too true , mate , too true ! " said the Cabby .
" A ' ard world it was .
I always did say those paving - stones were n't fair on any ' oss .
That 's Lunn'on , that is .
I did n't like it no more than what you did .
You were a country ' oss , and I was a country man .
Used to sing in the choir , I did , down at ' ome .
But there was n't a living for me there . "
" Oh please , please , " said Digory .
" Could we get on ?
The Lion 's getting further and further away .
And I do want to speak to him so dreadfully badly . "
" Look ' ere , Strawberry , " said the Cabby .
" This young gen'leman ' as something on his mind that he wants to talk to the Lion about ; ' im you call Aslan .
Suppose you was to let ' im ride on your back ( which ' e 'd take it very kindly ) and trot ' im over to where the Lion is .
And me and the little girl will be following along . "
" Ride ? " said Strawberry .
" Oh , I remember now .
That means sitting on my back .
I remember there used to be a little one of you two - leggers used to do that long ago .
He used to have little hard , square lumps of some white stuff that he gave me .
They tasted -- oh , wonderful , sweeter than grass . "
" Ah , that 'd be sugar , " said the Cabby .
" Please , Strawberry , " begged Digory , " do , do let me get up and take me to Aslan . "
" Well , I do n't mind , " said the Horse .
" Not for once in a way .
Up you get . "
" Good old Strawberry , " said the Cabby .
" ' Ere , young ' un , I 'll give you a lift . "
Digory was soon on Strawberry 's back , and quite comfortable , for he had ridden bare - back before on his own pony .
" Now , do gee up , Strawberry , " he said .
" You do n't happen to have a bit of that white stuff about you , I suppose ? " said the Horse .
" No .
I 'm afraid I have n't , " said Digory .
" Well , it ca n't be helped , " said Strawberry , and off they went .
At that moment a large Bulldog , who had been sniffing and staring very hard , said :
" Look .
Is n't there another of these queer creatures -- over there , beside the river , under the trees ? "
Then all the animals looked and saw Uncle Andrew , standing very still among the rhododendrons and hoping he would n't be noticed .
" Come on ! " said several voices .
" Let 's go and find out . "
So , while Strawberry was briskly trotting away with Digory in one direction ( and Polly and the Cabby were following on foot ) most of the creatures rushed towards Uncle Andrew with roars , barks , grunts , and various noises of cheerful interest .
We must now go back a bit and explain what the whole scene had looked like from Uncle Andrew 's point of view .
It has not made at all the same impression on him as on the Cabby and the children .
For what you see and hear depends a good deal on where you are standing : it also depends on what sort of person you are .
Ever since the animals had first appeared , Uncle Andrew had been shrinking further and further back into the thicket .
He watched them very hard of course ; but he was n't really interested in seeing what they were doing , only in seeing whether they were going to make a rush at him .
Like the Witch , he was dreadfully practical .
He simply did n't notice that Aslan was choosing one pair out of every kind of beasts .
All he saw , or thought he saw , was a lot of dangerous wild animals walking vaguely about .
And he kept on wondering why the other animals did n't run away from the big Lion .
When the great moment came and the Beasts spoke , he missed the whole point ; for a rather interesting reason .
When the Lion had first begun singing , long ago when it was still quite dark , he had realised that the noise was a song .
And he had disliked the song very much .
It made him think and feel things he did not want to think and feel .
Then , when the sun rose and he saw that the singer was a lion ( " _only_ a lion , " as he said to himself ) he tried his hardest to make himself believe that it was n't singing and never had been singing -- only roaring as any lion might in a zoo in our own world .
" Of course it ca n't really have been singing , " he thought , " I must have imagined it .
I 've been letting my nerves get out of order .
Who ever heard of a lion singing ? "
And the longer and more beautifully the Lion sang , the harder Uncle Andrew tried to make himself believe that he could hear nothing but roaring .
Now the trouble about trying to make yourself stupider than you really are is that you very often succeed .
Uncle Andrew did .
He soon did hear nothing but roaring in Aslan 's song .
Soon he could n't have heard anything else even if he had wanted to .
And when at last the Lion spoke and said , " Narnia awake , " he did n't hear any words : he heard only a snarl .
And when the Beasts spoke in answer , he heard only barkings , growlings , bayings and howlings .
And when they laughed -- well , you can imagine .
That was worse for Uncle Andrew than anything that had happened yet .
Such a horrid , bloodthirsty din of hungry and angry brutes he had never heard in his life .
Then , to his utter rage and horror , he saw the other three humans actually walking out into the open to meet the animals .
" The fools ! " he said to himself .
" Now those brutes will eat the Rings along with the children and I 'll never be able to get home again .
What a selfish little boy that Digory is !
And the others are just as bad .
If they want to throw away their own lives , that 's their business .
But what about _me_ ?
They do n't seem to think of that .
No one thinks of _me_ . "
Finally , when a whole crowd of animals came rushing towards him , he turned and ran for his life .
And now anyone could see that the air of that young world was really doing the old gentleman good .
In London he had been far too old to run : now , he ran at a speed which would have made him certain to win the hundred yards ' race at any Prep . school in England .
His coat - tails flying out behind him were a fine sight .
But of course it was no use .
Many of the animals behind him were swift ones ; it was the first run they had ever taken in their lives and they were all longing to use their new muscles .
" After him !
After him ! " they shouted .
" Perhaps he 's that Neevil !
Tally - ho !
Tantivy !
Cut him off !
Round him up !
Keep it up !
Hurrah ! "
In a very few minutes some of them got ahead of him .
They lined up in a row and barred his way .
Others hemmed him in from behind .
Wherever he looked he saw terrors .
Antlers of great elks and the huge face of an elephant towered over him .
Heavy , serious - minded bears and boars grunted behind him .
Cool - looking leopards and panthers with sarcastic faces ( as he thought ) stared at him and waved their tails .
What struck him most of all was the number of open mouths .
The animals had really opened their mouths to pant ; he thought they had opened their mouths to eat him .
Uncle Andrew stood trembling and swaying this way and that .
He had never liked animals at the best of times , being usually rather afraid of them ; and of course years of doing cruel experiments on animals had made him hate and fear them far more .
" Now , sir , " said the Bulldog in his business - like way , " are you animal , vegetable or mineral ? "
That was what it really said ; but all Uncle Andrew heard was " Gr -- r -- r -- arrh -- ow ! "