" Know , O Warlike Kings , " said Emeth , " and you , O Ladies , whose beauty illuminates the universe , that I am Emeth , the seventh son of Harpa Tarkaan of the city of Tehishbaan , Westward beyond the desert .
I came lately into Narnia with nine and twenty others under the command of Rishda Tarkaan .
Now when I first heard that we should march upon Narnia , I rejoiced ; for I had heard many things of your Land and desired greatly to meet you in battle .
But when I found that we were to go in disguised as merchants ( which is a shameful dress for a warrior and the son of a Tarkaan ) and to work by lies and trickery , then my joy departed from me .
And most of all when I found we must wait upon a monkey , and when it began to be said that Tash and Aslan were one , then the world became dark in my eyes .
For always since I was a boy , I have served Tash and my great desire was to know more of him and , if it might be , to look upon his face .
But the name of Aslan was hateful to me .
" And , as you have seen , we were called together outside the straw - roofed hovel , night after night , and the fire was kindled , and the Ape brought forth out of the hovel something upon four legs that I could not well see .
And the people and the Beasts bowed down and did honour to it .
But I thought , the Tarkaan is deceived by the Ape : for this thing that comes out of the stable is neither Tash nor any other god .
But when I watched the Tarkaan 's face , and marked every word that he said to the Monkey , then I changed my mind : for I saw that the Tarkaan did not believe in it himself .
And then I understood that he did not believe in Tash at all : for if he had , how could he dare to mock him ?
" When I understood this , a great rage fell upon me and I wondered that the true Tash did not strike down both the Monkey and the Tarkaan with fire from heaven .
Nevertheless I hid my anger and held my tongue and waited to see how it would end .
But last night , as some of you know , the Monkey brought forth not the yellow thing , but said that all who desired to look upon Tashlan -- for so they mixed the two words to pretend that they were all one -- must pass one by one into the hovel .
And I said to myself , Doubtless this is some other deception .
But when the Cat had gone in and had come out again in a madness of terror , then I said to myself , ' Surely the true Tash , whom they called on without knowledge or belief , has now come among us , and will avenge himself .
' And though my heart was turned into water inside me because of the greatness and terror of Tash , yet my desire was stronger than my fear , and I put force upon my knees to stay them from trembling , and on my teeth that they should not chatter , and resolved to look upon the face of Tash , though he should slay me .
So I offered myself to go into the hovel ; and the Tarkaan , though unwillingly , let me go .
" As soon as I had gone through the door , the first wonder was that I found myself in this great sunlight ( as we all are now ) though the inside of the hovel had looked dark from outside .
But I had no time to marvel at this , for immediately I was forced to fight for my head against one of our own men .
As soon as I saw him , I understood that the Monkey and the Tarkaan had set him there to slay any who came in if he were not in their secrets : so that this man also was a liar and a mocker and no true servant of Tash .
I had the better will to fight him ; and having slain the villain , I cast him out behind me through the door .
" Then I looked about me and saw the sky and the wide lands and smelled the sweetness .
And I said , By the Gods , this is a pleasant place : it may be that I am come into the country of Tash .
And I began to journey into the strange country and to seek him .
" So I went over much grass and many flowers and among all kinds of wholesome and delectable trees till lo ! in a narrow place between two rocks there came to meet me a great Lion .
The speed of him was like the ostrich , and his size was an elephant 's ; his hair was like pure gold and the brightness of his eyes , like gold that is liquid in the furnace .
He was more terrible than the Flaming Mountain of Lagour , and in beauty he surpassed all that is in the world , even as the rose in bloom surpasses the dust of the desert .
Then I fell at his feet and thought , Surely this is the hour of death , for the Lion ( who is worthy of all honour ) will know that I have served Tash all my days and not him .
Nevertheless , it is better to see the Lion and die than to be Tisroc of the world and live and not to have seen him .
But the Glorious One bent down his golden head and touched my forehead with his tongue and said , Son , thou art welcome .
But I said , Alas , Lord , I am no son of Thine but the servant of Tash .
He answered , Child , all the service thou hast done to Tash , I account as service done to me .
Then by reason of my great desire for wisdom and understanding , I overcame my fear and questioned the Glorious One and said , Lord , is it then true , as the Ape said , that thou and Tash are one ?
The Lion growled so that the earth shook ( but his wrath was not against me ) and said , It is false .
Not because he and I are one , but because we are opposites , I take to me the services which thou hast done to him , for I and he are of such different kinds that no service which is vile can be done to me , and none which is not vile can be done to him .
Therefore if any man swear by Tash and keep his oath for the oath 's sake , it is by me that he has truly sworn , though he know it not , and it is I who reward him .
And if any man do a cruelty in my name , then , though he says the name Aslan , it is Tash whom he serves and by Tash his deed is accepted .
Dost thou understand , Child ?
I said , Lord , thou knowest how much I understand .
But I said also ( for the truth constrained me ) , Yet I have been seeking Tash all my days .
Beloved , said the Glorious One , unless thy desire had been for me thou wouldst not have sought so long and so truly .
For all find what they truly seek .
" Then he breathed upon me and took away the trembling from my limbs and caused me to stand upon my feet .
And after that , he said not much but that we should meet again , and I must go further up and further in .
Then he turned him about in a storm and flurry of gold and was gone suddenly .
" And since then , O Kings and Ladies , I have been wandering to find him and my happiness is so great that it even weakens me like a wound .
And this is the marvel of marvels , that he called me , Beloved , me who am but as a dog ---- "
" Eh ?
What 's that ? " said one of the Dogs .
" Sir , " said Emeth .
" It is but a fashion of speech which we have in Calormen . "
" Well , I ca n't say it 's one I like very much , " said the Dog .
" He does n't mean any harm , " said an older Dog .
" After all , _we_ call our puppies , _Boys_ , when they do n't behave properly . "
" So we do , " said the first Dog .
" Or , _girls_ . "
" S-s - sh ! " said the Old Dog .
" That 's not a nice word to use .
Remember where you are . "
" Look ! " said Jill suddenly .
Someone was coming , rather timidly , to meet them ; a graceful creature on four feet , all silvery - grey .
And they stared at him for a whole ten seconds before five or six voices said all at once , " Why , it 's old Puzzle ! "
They had never seen him by day light with the lionskin off , and it made an extraordinary difference .
He was himself now : a beautiful donkey with such a soft , grey coat and such a gentle , honest face that if you had seen him you would have done just what Jill and Lucy did -- rushed forward and put your arms round his neck and kissed his nose and stroked his ears .
When they asked him where he had been , he said he had come in at the door along with all the other creatures but he had -- well , to tell the truth , he had been keeping out of their way as much as he could ; and out of Aslan 's way .
For the sight of the real Lion had made him so ashamed of all that nonsense about dressing up in a lionskin that he did not know how to look anyone in the face .
But when he saw that all his friends were going away westward , and after he had had a mouthful or so of grass ( " And I 've never tasted such good grass in my life , " said Puzzle ) , he plucked up his courage and followed .
" But what I 'll do if I really have to meet Aslan , I 'm sure I do n't know , " he added .
" You 'll find it will be all right when you really do , " said Queen Lucy .
Then they all went forward together , always westward , for that seemed to be the direction Aslan had meant when he cried out " Further up and further in . "
Many other creatures were slowly moving the same way , but that grassy country was very wide and there was no crowding .
It still seemed to be early and the morning freshness was in the air .
They kept on stopping to look round and to look behind them , partly because it was so beautiful but partly also because there was something about it which they could not understand .
" Peter , " said Lucy , " where is this , do you suppose ? "
" I do n't know , " said the High King .
" It reminds me of somewhere but I ca n't give it a name .
Could it be somewhere we once stayed for a holiday when we were very , very small ? "
" It would have to have been a jolly good holiday , " said Eustace .
" I bet there is n't a country like this anywhere in our world .
Look at the colours ?
You could n't get a blue like the blue on those mountains in our world . "
" Is it not Aslan 's country ? " said Tirian .
" Not like Aslan 's country on top of that mountain beyond the eastern end of the world , " said Jill .
" I 've been there . "
" If you ask me , " said Edmund , " Its like somewhere in the Narnian world .
Look at those mountains ahead -- and the big ice - mountains beyond them .
Surely they 're rather like the mountains we used to see from Narnia , the ones up Westward beyond the Waterfall ? "
" Yes , so they are , " said Peter .
" Only these are bigger . "
" I do n't think _those_ ones are so very like anything in Narnia , " said Lucy .
" But look there . "
She pointed south ward to their left , and everyone stopped and turned to look .
" Those hills , " said Lucy , " the nice woody ones and the blue ones behind -- are n't they very like the southern border of Narnia ? "
" Like ! " cried Edmund after a moment 's silence .
" Why they 're exactly like .
Look , there 's Mount Pire with his forked head , and there 's the pass into Archenland and everything ! "
" And yet they 're not like , " said Lucy .
" They 're different .
They have more colours on them and they look further away than I remembered and they 're more ... more ... oh , I do n't know .... "
" More like the real thing , " said the Lord Digory softly .
Suddenly Farsight the Eagle spread his wings , soared thirty or forty feet up into the air , circled round and then alighted on the ground .
" Kings and Queens , " he cried , " we have all been blind .
We are only beginning to see where we are .
From up there I have seen it all -- Ettinsmuir , Beaversdam , the Great River , and Cair Paravel still shining on the edge of the Eastern Sea .
Narnia is not dead .
This is Narnia . "
" But how can it be ? " said Peter .
" For Aslan told us older ones that we should never return to Narnia , and here we are . "
" Yes , " said Eustace .
" And we saw it all destroyed and the sun put out . "
" And it 's all so different , " said Lucy .
" The Eagle is right , " said the Lord Digory .
" Listen , Peter .
When Aslan said you could never go back to Narnia , he meant the Narnia you were thinking of .
But that was not the real Narnia .
That had a beginning and an end .
It was only a shadow or a copy of the real Narnia , which has always been here and always will be here : just as our own world , England and all , is only a shadow or copy of something in Aslan 's real world .
You need not mourn over Narnia , Lucy .
All of the old Narnia that mattered , all the dear creatures , have been drawn into the real Narnia through the Door .
And of course it is different ; as different as a real thing is from a shadow or as waking life is from a dream . "
His voice stirred everyone like a trumpet as he spoke these words : but when he added under his breath " It 's all in Plato , all in Plato : bless me , what _do_ they teach them at these schools ! " the older ones laughed .
It was so exactly like the sort of thing they had heard him say long ago in that other world where his beard was grey instead of golden .
He knew why they were laughing and joined in the laugh himself .
But very quickly they all became grave again : for , as you know , there is a kind of happiness and wonder that makes you serious .
It is too good to waste on jokes .
It is as hard to explain how this sunlit land was different from the old Narnia , as it would be to tell you how the fruits of that country taste .
Perhaps you will get some idea of it , if you think like this .
You may have been in a room in which there was a window that looked out on a lovely bay of the sea or a green valley that wound away among mountains .
And in the wall of that room opposite to the window there may have been a looking glass .
And as you turned away from the window you suddenly caught sight of that sea or that valley , all over again , in the looking glass .
And the sea in the mirror , or the valley in the mirror , were in one sense just the same as the real ones : yet at the same time they were somehow different -- deeper , more wonderful , more like places in a story : in a story you have never heard but very much want to know .
The difference between the old Narnia and the new Narnia was like that .
The new one was a deeper country : every rock and flower and blade of grass looked as if it meant more .
I ca n't describe it any better than that : if you ever get there , you will know what I mean .
It was the Unicorn who summed up what everyone was feeling .
He stamped his right fore-hoof on the ground and neighed and then cried :
" I have come home at last !
This is my real country !
I belong here .
This is the land I have been looking for all my life , though I never knew it till now .
The reason why we loved the old Narnia is that it sometimes looked a little like this .
Bree - hee - hee !
Come further up , come further in ! "
He shook his mane and sprang forward into a great gallop -- a Unicorn 's gallop which , in our world , would have carried him out of sight in a few moments .
But now a most strange thing happened .
Everyone else began to run , and they found , to their astonishment , that they could keep up with him : not only the Dogs and the humans but even fat little Puzzle and short - legged Poggin the Dwarf .
The air flew in their faces as if they were driving fast in a car without a windscreen .
The country flew past as if they were seeing it from the windows of an express train .
Faster and faster they raced , but no one got hot or tired or out of breath .