But his misery did not last long .
Almost at once there came a bump , and then a second bump , and two children were standing before him .
The wood in front of him had been quite empty a second before and he knew they had not come from behind his tree , for he would have heard them .
They had in fact simply appeared from nowhere .
He saw at a glance that they were wearing the same queer , dingy sort of clothes as the people in his dream ; and he saw , at a second glance , that they were the youngest boy and girl out of that party of seven .
" Gosh ! " said the Boy , " that took one 's breath away !
I thought ---- "
" Hurry up and get him untied , " said the girl .
" We can talk afterwards . "
Then she added , turning to Tirian , " I 'm sorry we 've been so long .
We came the moment we could . "
While she was speaking the Boy had produced a knife from his pocket and was quickly cutting the King 's bonds : too quickly , in fact , for the King was so stiff and numb that when the last cord was cut he fell forward on his hands and knees .
He could n't get up again till he had brought some life back into his legs by a good rubbing .
" I say , " said the girl .
" It was you , was n't it , who appeared to us that night when we were all at supper ?
Nearly a week ago . "
" A week , fair maid ? " said Tirian .
" My dream led me into your world scarce ten minutes since . "
" It 's the usual muddle about times , Pole , " said the Boy .
" I remember now , " said Tirian .
" That too comes in all the old tales .
The time of your strange land is different from ours .
But if we speak of Time , 'tis time to be gone from here : for my enemies are close at hand .
Will you come with me ? "
" Of course , " said the girl .
" It 's you we 've come to help . "
Tirian got to his feet and led them rapidly downhill , southward and away from the stable .
He knew well where he meant to go but his first aim was to get to rocky places where they would leave no trail , and his second to cross some water so that they would leave no scent .
This took them about an hour 's scrambling and wading and while that was going on nobody had any breath to talk .
But even so , Tirian kept on stealing glances at his companions .
The wonder of walking beside the creatures from another world made him feel a little dizzy : but it also made all the old stories seem far more real than they had ever seemed before ... anything might happen now .
" Now , " said Tirian as they came to the head of a little valley which ran down before them among young birch trees , " we are out of danger of those villains for a space and may walk more easily . "
The sun had risen , dew - drops were twinkling on every branch , and birds were singing .
" What about some grub ?
-- I mean for you , Sir ; we two have had our breakfast , " said the Boy .
Tirian wondered very much what he meant by " grub , " but when the Boy opened a bulgy satchel which he was carrying and pulled out a rather greasy and squashy packet , he understood .
He was ravenously hungry , though he had n't thought about it till that moment .
There were two hard - boiled egg sandwiches , and two cheese sandwiches , and two with some kind of paste in them .
If he had n't been so hungry , he would n't have thought much of the paste , for that is a sort of food nobody eats in Narnia .
By the time he had eaten all six sandwiches they had come to the bottom of the valley and there they found a moss cliff with a little fountain bubbling out of it .
All three stopped and drank and splashed their hot faces .
" And now , " said the girl as she tossed her wet hair back from her forehead , " are n't you going to tell us who you are and why you were tied up and what it 's all about ? "
" With a good will , damsel , " said Tirian .
" But we must keep on the march . "
So while they went on walking he told them who he was and all the things that had happened to him .
" And now , " he said at the end , " I am going to a certain tower , one of three that were built in my grandsire 's time to guard Lantern Waste against certain perilous outlaws who dwelled there in his day .
By Aslan 's good will I was not robbed of my keys .
In that tower we shall find store of weapons and mail and some victuals also , though no better than dry biscuit .
There also we can lie safe while we make our plans .
And now , prithee , tell me who you two are and all your story . "
" I 'm Eustace Scrubb and this is Jill Pole , " said the Boy .
" And we were here once before , ages and ages ago , more than a year ago by our time , and there was a chap called Prince Rilian , and they were keeping this chap underground , and Puddle - glum put his foot in ---- "
" Ha ! " cried Tirian , " are you then that Eustace and that Jill who rescued King Rilian from his long enchantment ? "
" Yes , that 's us , " said Jill .
" So he 's King Rilian now , is he ?
Oh of course he would be .
I forgot ---- "
" Nay , " said Tirian , " I am the seventh in descent from him .
He has been dead over two hundred years . "
Jill made a face .
" Ugh ! " she said .
" That 's the horrid part about coming back to Narnia . "
But Eustace went on .
" Well now you know who we are , Sire , " he said .
" And it was like this .
The Professor and Aunt Polly had got all us friends of Narnia together ---- "
" I know not these names , Eustace , " said Tirian .
" They 're the two who came into Narnia at the very beginning , the day all the animals learned to talk . "
" By the Lion 's Mane , " cried Tirian .
" Those two !
The Lord Digory and the Lady Polly !
From the dawn of the world !
And still alive in your place ?
The wonder and the glory of it !
But tell me , tell me . "
" She is n't really our aunt , you know , " said Eustace .
" She 's Miss Plummer , but we call her Aunt Polly .
Well , those two got us all together : partly just for fun so that we could all have a good jaw about Narnia ( for of course there 's no one else we can ever talk to about things like that ) but partly because the Professor had a feeling that we were somehow wanted over here .
Well then you came in like a ghost or goodness - knows - what and nearly frightened the lives out of us and vanished without saying a word .
After that , we knew for certain there was something up .
The next question was how to get here .
You ca n't go just by wanting to .
So we talked and talked and at last the Professor said the only way would be by the Magic Rings .
It was by those Rings that he and Aunt Polly got here long , long ago when they were only kids , years before we younger ones were born .
But the Rings had all been buried in the garden of a house in London ( that 's our big town , Sire ) and the house had been sold .
So then the problem was how to get at them .
You 'll never guess what we did in the end !
Peter and Edmund -- that 's the High King Peter , the one who spoke to you -- went up to London to get into the garden from the back , early in the morning before people were up .
They were dressed like workmen so that if anyone did see them it would look as if they 'd come to do something about the drains .
I wish I 'd been with them : it must have been glorious fun .
And they must have succeeded for next day Peter sent us a wire -- that 's a sort of message , Sire , I 'll explain about it some other time -- to say he 'd got the Rings .
And the day after that was the day Pole and I had to go back to school -- we 're the only two who are still at school and we 're at the same one .
So Peter and Edmund were to meet us at a place on the way down to school and hand over the Rings .
It had to be us two who were to go to Narnia , you see , because the older ones could n't come again .
So we got into the train -- that 's kind of thing people travel in in our world : a lot of wagons chained together -- and the Professor and Aunt Polly and Lucy came with us .
We wanted to keep together as long as we could .
Well there we were in the train .
And we were just getting to the station where the others were to meet us , and I was looking out of the window to see if I could see them when suddenly there came a most frightful jerk and a noise : and there we were in Narnia and there was your Majesty tied up to the tree . "
" So you never used the Rings ? " said Tirian .
" No , " said Eustace .
" Never even saw them .
Aslan did it all for us in his own way without any Rings . "
" But the High King Peter has them , " said Tirian .
" Yes , " said Jill .
" But we do n't think he can use them .
When the two other Pevensies -- King Edmund and Queen Lucy -- were last here , Aslan said they would never come to Narnia again .
And he said something of the same sort to the High King , only longer ago .
You may be sure he 'll come like a shot if he 's allowed . "
" Gosh ! " said Eustace .
" It 's getting hot in this sun .
Are we nearly there , Sire ? "
" Look , " said Tirian and pointed .
Not many yards away grey battlements rose above the treetops , and after a minute 's more walking they came out in an open grassy space .
A stream ran across it and on the far side of the stream stood a squat , square tower with very few and narrow windows and one heavy - looking door in the wall that faced them .
Tirian looked sharply this way and that to make sure that no enemies were in sight .
Then he walked up to the tower and stood still for a moment fishing up his bunch of keys which he wore inside his hunting - dress on a narrow silver chain that went round his neck .
It was a nice bunch of keys that he brought out , for two were golden and many were richly ornamented : you could see at once that they were keys made for opening solemn and secret rooms in palaces , or chests and caskets of sweet - smelling wood that contained royal treasures .
But the key which he now put into the lock of the door was big and plain and more rudely made .
The lock was stiff and for a moment Tirian was afraid that he would not be able to turn it : But at last he did and the door swung open with a sullen creak .
" Welcome , friends , " said Tirian .
" I fear this is the best palace that the King of Narnia can now offer to his guests . "
Tirian was pleased to see that the two strangers had been well brought up .
They both said not to mention it and that they were sure it would be very nice .
As a matter of fact it was not particularly nice .
It was rather dark and smelled very damp .
There was only one room in it and this room went right up to the stone roof : a wooden staircase in one corner led up to a trap door by which you could get out on the battlements .
There were a few rude bunks to sleep in , and a great many lockers and bundles .
There was also a hearth which looked as if nobody had lit a fire in it for a great many years .
" We 'd better go out and gather some firewood first thing , had n't we ? " said Jill .
" Not yet , comrade , " said Tirian .
He was determined that they should not be caught unarmed , and began searching the lockers , thankfully remembering that he had always been careful to have these garrison towers inspected once a year to make sure that they were stocked with all things needful .
The bow strings were there in their coverings of oiled silk , the swords and spears were greased against rust , and the armour was kept bright in its wrappings .
But there was something even better .
" Look ! " said Tirian as he drew out a long mail shirt of a curious pattern and flashed it before the children 's eyes .
" That 's funny looking mail , Sire , " said Eustace .
" Aye , lad , " said Tirian .
" No Narnian dwarf smithied that .
'Tis mail of Calormen , outlandish gear .
I have ever kept a few suits of it in readiness , for I never knew when I or my friends might have reason to walk unseen in the Tisroc 's land .
And look on this stone bottle .
In this there is a juice which , when we have rubbed it on our hands and faces , will make us brown as Calormenes . "
" Oh hurrah ! " said Jill .
" Disguises !
I love disguises . "
Tirian showed them how to pour out a little of the juice into the palms of their hands and then rub it well over their faces and necks , right down to the shoulders , and then on their hands , right up to the elbows .
He did the same himself .
" After this has hardened on us , " he said , " we may wash in water and it will not change .
Nothing but oil and ashes will make us white Narnians again .
And now , sweet Jill , let us go see how this mail - shirt becomes you .
'Tis something too long , yet not so much as I feared .
Doubtless it belonged to a page in the train of one of their Tarkaans . "
After the mail shirts they put on Calormene helmets , which are little round ones fitting tight to the head and having a spike on top .
Then Tirian took long rolls of some white stuff out of the locker and wound them over the helmets till they became turbans : but the little steel spike still stuck up in the middle .
He and Eustace took curved Calormene swords and little round shields .
There was no sword light enough for Jill , but he gave her a long , straight hunting knife which might do for a sword at a pinch .
" Hast any skill with the bow , maiden ? " said Tirian .
" Nothing worth talking of , " said Jill blushing .
" Scrubb 's not bad . "
" Do n't you believe her , Sire , " said Eustace .
" We 've both been practicing archery ever since we got back from Narnia last time , and she 's about as good as I now .
Not that either of us is much . "
Then Tirian gave Jill a bow and a quiver full of arrows .
The next business was to light a fire , for inside that tower it still felt more like a cave than like anything indoors and set one shivering .
But they got warm gathering the wood -- the sun was now at its highest -- and when once the blaze was roaring up the chimney the place began to look cheerful .
Dinner was , however , a dull meal , for the best they could do was to pound up some of the hard biscuit which they found in a locker and pour it into boiling water , with salt , so as to make a kind of porridge .
And there was nothing to drink but water .
" I wish we 'd brought a packet of tea , " said Jill .
" Or a tin of cocoa , " said Eustace .
" A firkin or so of good wine in each of these towers would not have been amiss , " said Tirian .